David Mamet, right? Only action drama action drama Action.
Angle, angle, angle way. Don't even have to really get garrison to read anything now.
Hi. I'm stu willis and welcome to draft zero. A podcast. Where to? Ozzy? Filmmakers try to work out what makes great screenplays work.
On Im chas fisher.
And today's topic is unfilmables, that alleged,
screenwriting faux pas where you write things that can't ever possibly be viewed through a camera and represented on a screen.
And thie examples that we will be looking at to help us decide,
when, where and how to use unfilmables are LETHAL WEAPON,
the Brian Duffield Specs script YOUR BRIDESMAID IS A BITCH HEREDITARY,
Battlestar Galactica, the KILLING EVE Pilot, SPARTAN, the SHARP OBJECTS Pilot, the FLEABAG Pilot,
DRIVE THE NICE GUYS, THREE BILLBOARDS OUTSIDE EBBING MISSOURI MICHAEL CLAYTON and Tree of Life.
And it's worth learning that this is actually part one of what will be a two part episode, because we're going to take the learnings from this episode and then apply them to a longer examples in part two.
Yes, so in a way, this episode is going to be looking about at how to use unfilmables in micro moments in a screenplay.
Kind of like in a scene level rather than a sequel.
Yeah, and the second part will be howto build unfilmables into those great big cinematic juicy moments.
Basically, for the first time in what feels like a long time, we're going to the page and looking at the page and determining how to write on the page.
The feeling that is part of cinema.
Well, yeah, because a CZ we've talked about often, including in that,
previous back manner episode, you know, riding the experience is obviously part of our biases, as writer writers write that we believe that the job of the rider is to write the experience.
And part of that is because in the context of a script, whether it's a speck or otherwise, you convincing a lot of people over a long period of time, spend a lot of money and time and energy making this thing.
So you want to kind of constantly remind them from the page what it is they're making.
That's our biases, and I think we need to acknowledge upfront before we get into what is quote unquote unfilmables.
That's the lens that we're looking at these examples through.
Yes, on The reason we are looking at unfilmables to begin with is it's one of those things that you hear said and look, I've even had,
readers of competitions or screenplay services Come back to me and say this cannot possibly be realised through a camera.
Therefore, you should not include it in a screenplay.
You've had that moat, you actually know.
Yes, I have.
I've had that debate with the co writer on a project where he kind of wanted us to micromanage the performance. In terms of physical description, eyes go wide, you know, her breath slows, and some people like running that way.
But I don't think that's necessarily which we'll get to when we talk about performance. The best way to write performance, particularly for actors, maybe good in terms of people visualising.
But it's not necessarily great for actors, and it doesn't necessarily create the feeling some actors like Joaquin Phoenix in which you want you were never really here, which I think we'll talk about in the next episode.
Like that performance is actually really very un busy. Bet carries so much.
It's like Ryan Gosling and DRIVE, which were also recovering today.
And before we go into these examples, if you're interested, we're actually going to be uploading this podcast with accompanying video on YouTube,
so you can see examples or hear the examples thing, the big print being read out while watching the visual so you can see how they translated.
It won't be out as soon as this podcast is out, but you should script subscribe to us on YouTube because we're going to be doing more and more of this, basically releasing what we call enhanced podcasts once again, thanks to our patriots for making it possible.
We've already got enhanced pod cast out for the game of thrones episodes, so you should cheque that out.
So what is an unfilmables jazz.
Well, okay. The theory that I feel is espoused on amateur screenwriting forums,
is that you are only supposed to write in a screenplay Exactly what you are seeing portrayed on the screen.
And hearing that's important? Otherwise you wouldn't be running dialogue it all.
Yeah, yeah. Yep, that is,
quite thanks, Teo, but I think the inherent irony of unfilmables as an idea is part of our selection of this homework.
Was putting out a call for moments in cinema that we had this rousing feeling.
I called it all. But it's not necessarily all.
Okay. Yeah, And having that innate curiosity is, too.
How did someone write that down on the page? Did they even write it down on the page?
Or was it then subsequently created by actors, directors, cinematographers, Editors, Music?
Sound designers.
Yes, sound designers. I mean, that's the I think one of the biggest things is that in screenplays you rarely see reference. We've got some examples tonight. Where tonight? Today, anyway.
This episode. We have some examples of this episode I'm next.
Where music is actually referenced like an eerie tone or an unsettling sound that's actually quite rare in my experience of reading screenplays.
And yet it's such a gn integral part of how film makes us feel when we watch it.
So an unfilmables Teo answer Your question is anything that is describing something that is not what you see or hear on screen.
All right And this brings us to a definition that we we were given back in our episode on forging rules Storey rules in TV parts that we did with Grant name enable.
And he described the difference between what he thought was dramatic technique and literary technique.
And in that context, it was comparing like the shield with madman and he was goingto aristo. Alright, Essentially, drama is the chain of cause and I'm and you listen to it more recently to may.
He was going backto Aristotle.
Drama is the chain of events ofthe cause and effect. It is action is primarily based in action.
And so for dramatists, what you see and you hear is a ll. That a driver is because it's about what the characters do.
But more specifically, that also means that everything that happens on screen is dia jet IQ.
And by that we mean within the storey worlds and that the characters are aware of it.
So we're seeing and understanding the world and the events as the characters themselves see them and understand that we don't actually access thie interiority off the character, right?
And that's I think that's a word that I didn't use in the game of thrones episodes, but that's exactly what it kind of was about. How do you access thie interiority of the character like their internal thoughts?
Obviously, in a book, we get access to their monologues, potentially right, we can get access to their thought.
That's why people use voice overs as well.
Literary, in contrast, is the techniques, broadly speaking, that the audience experiences that the character does not.
So symbolism is an example, right?
Or actually score scores. The most basic example we call it non die jet IQ score is the most literary technique in cinema, because it makes us feel something.
Background Music
But it doesn't necessarily make the Khun reflect what the characters are feeling. But it's not informing how the characters feel yet.
Yeah, the characters aren't hearing their own score.
So Luke, standing looking at the twin suns in Tanta Lian with that great score and the way that that light motive, if I'm pronouncing it correctly, the lead mode. If that melody, that specific moment is then use later to recall specific moments, that's for the audience.
It's not for the character and maybe reminding us how the characters feel brings us back to their place because we don't access smell and smells a great memory recall.
But it's a literary technique, and I would I would say that unfilmables our literary techniques, right?
Yes, I would second that.
But on the page there a literary technique, but they're not necessarily a literary technique when they're rendered on screen, all right.
You've you score as the obvious go to as a literary technique over dramatic technique when talking about cinema.
But I would actually say there's one other one that is so sublimely obvious that we rarely think off as screenwriters.
Score is one of them that rarely gets written in screenplays, but the other is framing just simple, framing off a character on the most.
The example that comes to me most often is how in the king's speech, which is a film we've looked at before so often Burti is framed in against a vast area of negative space.
He's often in one corner of the frame rather than in, you know, a central area of the frame.
Well, I believe when speaking with a prince, one waits for the prince to choose the top.
Waiting for mate.
Commence a conversation one. Khun, wait.
Which in turn makes him feel isolated. It makes him feel small.
That is something that the director and the cinematographer have decided that conveys feeling that conveys narrative to the audience, which may or may not be written on the page.
And ironically, a lot of what we're going to be talking about today is another No, no, as per you know, screenplay Fascists, which is directing from the page.
But because this's this kind of shit eats us up for performance beats later on.
I've ordered it. The Master Class by Larry Moss, who's an acting teacher a couple of times times.
Now, if you're a writer, go on audit acting classes. You don't have to G trained as an actor, but going Audit Tum and Larry Moss mainly he does theatre.
He's like the acting coach Leonardo to catch.
This guy's got amazing credentials, and he basically tell the actors When you do my course, it is all about the writer and writers intent.
Go back to the text, go back to the text that's and he will go on break down like it's monologue might not be working, and rather than actually directing the meaning and the emotion he just directs.
The punctuation and the emotion comes from the punctuation, he says. This.
It's a very theatre way of looking at script a text.
Exactly is a very feet away, but they're actually expecting you to direct that he is looking to the writer and the text for direction on the scene,
and so that idea that you shouldn't direct that on the page is bullshit because you're actually the first director because you are encouraging your choice of words and particularly unfilmables when we get to it, are about how people interpret your work.
If you want to go that fire, there is a style that literally try to replicate only what the camera sees and hears, which is the David Mamet style.
But that's pretty uncommon. A cz well, see, I think what we're dealing with is this irony that scripts are not experientially films, right, and we've talked about this and other episodes there.
Literary experiences they are like, Ultimately, it's divorced from kind of what we're seeing.
Yet you as a writer are trying to capture the experience ofthe cinema.
And that's why. And you should go on Listen to our white Speight's episode, if you haven't listened to it, because it's very much about that.
So this idea of unfilmables is kind of, I guess it's like screenplay fascism.
We kind of gatekeeping because there's this great quote from Stanley Kubrick that if it could be thought or it could be felt, it could be filmed on.
I don't think he's wrong and unfilmables that people might given example off is.
You know, like Chazz looks looks out the windows, looks out the window thinking about how much Stuart annoys the shit out of him right on the page. You look at that and go.
We're not seeing that. The audience will never know that. So you're imparting information to the reader that the eventual audience will have no idea of doing it.
But a director like Stanley Kubrick could take that and go well, well, having looking out the window will do a slow dissolve to him doing a dump,
coming back right, like there's ways to shoot that, you know, to communicate that idea.
But you not express them on the page in cinematic terms.
I mean, the irony is that in selecting our homework, we went about this in two different ways.
We looked for projects, both film and TV that had a lot off these literary as opposed to dramatic techniques.
So a lot of symbolism framing mood tone, etcetera to see whether that was reflected on the page.
And the other thing that we did was just look for those big, huge or inspiring cinematic moments on Looked at how they were written on the page.
And, you know, they're I say the irony because the irony is calling something unfilmables.
When it was filmed, something was actually filmed.
But where the screenplay fascists win some points is that some of those or inspiring moments on the page are not or inspiring at all, like none of that feeling.
All that experience comes across, so we are gonna have both positive, and I won't say negative, but certainly neutral examples.
Yes. Yeah, I think so. We're going to show Look out!
So our objective here with this episode is obviously we've got a bias because and panda biases when we want to write the experiences And two is I think both of us have actually become more brazen in our use of quote unquote unfilmables in our writing.
And I'm particularly become quite strong in performance and how I write performance on the page like I've got very strong feelings about how that should be done. I don't like micromanaging the actors.
I just don't actually think it works particularly well unless you're going for that kind of really hide and untouchables.
You know the report for the Battleship Potemkin? Kind of like montage decompressed style. I didn't actually think it particularly works.
The other thing that, I guess is the bias is towards Tony Mood. But I think that's because it's early on.
Andi, I'll say, and you don't like the terminology is cheating because I think you can sheep on the page by imparting information about the plot to the reader to make a film easy to follow.
But when you actually shoot the film, it's everyone surprised that it doesn't work, and I've said this before that I think plot is easier to read on the page to follow on the page and it is on screen and CAG, and actually performance and character is the other way around.
I still I still hold myself to that as a general rule of thumb.
Well, can I think what we're boiling down to before we actually jump into the examples is you and I had a sort of pre recording,
Khan flab where one of the most important questions and I think we'll come back to this question when we look at all the actual examples is what am I intending to communicate and to whom,
And this will so soon?
I both come from the point of view that unfilmables are not only acceptable, I would actually say there often to be encouraged, but.
The often necessary for clarity.
Yes or for experience tto make the read as good or as close and experience to the viewing of the eventual product that you want the script to become on DH.
One of the things we've noticed is that obviously screenwriting as ah goes through fashions and trends like everything else in terms of how it's written.
And it's clear that we're now in a moment where writers like Shane Black on Brian Duffield have opened the doors to being Mohr in direct communication between the writer and the reader of script, without,
any kind of thought to the characters or audience on DH.
They've opened that door, the now spec writers such as you and I are in this boat where what we have to do is make the read of our spec scripts,
as interesting and engaging and his close to the experience of watching the film as possible.
But and here's the big caveat that.
I will put in here is there will be situations and you call them cheating where,
you may be so good at writing on experience, but you're not thinking of actually how it will be dramatised on screens such that your screenplay will be this amazing read.
But anyone producing that script will be producing a so so movie because it's being written to be read, not to be produced.
That's a big caveat. I don't mind almost say that there's two versions of the script.
Andi. In fact, when we look a couple of examples next, some of these examples this time but particularly you were never really here. That's a shooting script.
And it reads like a shooting script because the audience for the script is actually crew right, And that's different from us at the specs stage, whether it's amusing spec, probably in that it's not green lit,
on non agreement script.
You're still training in our investors and producers and all that stuff. So it's a lot more for the read, whereas the shooting script can be what, more of a technical document and we're not discussing it, but I want to mention it now.
It's looking to show notes. I'm goingto there's a link to the Fury Road screenplay on Scene Ophelia, and it's like four hundred pages and it's got storyboards the whole way through the script.
It's a technical document on DH. I can't even e think he got it.
Somehow we gotta toe the line. He's George Mallory is amazing. I've worked with him.
This is me patting myself on the black like like he is a dude.
But I think that's kind of like a very different situation that most of the Syrian. So.
Well, James Cameron famously wrote script mints.
Yeah, all right. So coming back to that rule of thumb because we're not saying unfilmables Abad it's about turning when they are effective,
and one of me, that one of the points that'll go in, which is kind of like a metric is for clarity.
And that's part of a part of making sure that you're using it for clarity.
Is asking yourself that question is, what am I intended to communicate into whom on? I think an example is if I'm trying to communicate plot, it should always be for the audience, as in this audience of the eventual film, you know.
But there's actors, which has come to performance beats and readers, and I think you mentioned the idea that, ideally, quote unquote unfilmable well, actually address the actor.
The character, so we're speaking towards the character is separate from the actor, the reader of the script and the audience on I guess Crew is kind of like a separate thing, but you'll know those scripts when you read them.
I like Okay, this is kind of like a technical.
I'm not. I'm not saying it's the ideal, but I'm saying that if there is a line that you've written in your screenplay,
and that line will be communicated to either through or to the character that's actually in the screenplay,
on a lot of what will be talking about today's performance beats.
And obviously it's gets communicated to the reader on DH because it's communicated to the character and the character will be performed by this amazing actor, as directed by this amazing director as shot and, as edited et cetera, et cetera.
Then that ultimate line will, no matter how esoterica ll poetic it may be, will be communicated to the audience. So there's three.
I would say There's three kind of broad categories off target foreign unfilmables, which is the character, the reader and the audience.
And obviously someone's reading the script. So the reader is always a given as soon as you write a line that is either directed to the audience.
But the character is not aware of it, or it's directed to a character, and the audience will never be aware of it.
Or even worse, it's only directed to the reader on this is where we're going to start with our actual examples where it's a line this written in your screenplay.
It's written to the reader of your screenplay, and there is no way that the characters in the screenplay that you're reading or the audience of the eventual film or TV product.
Will ever be aware of the line that you've written or what it's intending to convey.
That's where there's I feel, a danger in unfilmables.
So not to say that they're not allowed because you know the first, the first examples will come teo prime examples of that that furthered those writers careers.
You and I are not here passing judgement on what's allowed or not allowed.
It's just, I think we want to impart on our listeners,
tools about knowing when it's appropriate to do it and how on DH, I've certainly learned some stuff from doing this homework, you know, have come into this topic with very,
kind of established views, and we've been leaning Mohr and Mohr towards unfilmables in our writing careers, so that's our bias.
But I've still learnt some really useful things from going through. These examples.
Yes, eso one of the classic.
And I mean there's like people know about this script because it's shame. Blacks first script.
It kind of kicked off the whole eighties spec wave in a certain kind of like smarmy self, where riding was a particular line from LETHAL WEAPON.
No, Gibson's a cop who's a LETHAL WEAPON KILLING EVE.
The risks don't scare him,
and this partner can't control them. You're gonna have to trust me.
Mel Gibson. Danny Glover LETHAL WEAPON through. I haven't even started.
So thie, aside from LETHAL WEAPON is.
Yes.
We are seen forty nine.
Gay Scene forty nine And one more thing before you go into these examples, thanks to the wonderful support of our patrons, we've been able to get an actress to actually read out the big print rather than us to make a little bit more interesting.
So thanks to carry Salih for agreeing to help out draft zero by reading his examples, she's a great actress,
and also for enabling us to do this and to Chris Walker for contributing his editing skills.
And thanks to our patriots.
All right into these examples. LETHAL WEAPON.
Exterior posh Beverly Hills Home Twilight, The kind of house that I'll buy if this movie is a huge hit.
Chrome glass carved wood, plus an outdoor solarium, a glass structure like a greenhouse, only there's a big swimming pool inside.
This is a really great place to have sex.
So what's the aside in this, Chazz?
Well, the aside, I would say, and you and I are referencing aside as the reader Sorry, the writer communicating directly to the reader of the script almost like as an actor breaking the fourth wall, talking straight down the barrel to the audience.
But this is a screenwriting equivalent of that, I would say The aside is the kind of house that I'll buy if this movie is a huge hit, because it's referencing the writer in the writing of the script.
It is pretty like jarring to get an eye that we know you, but an eye.
Yeah, there's two unfilmables in this section. There's breaking the fourth wall, and the first one isn't aside.
The second unfilmables is a much safer or lower risk. This is the lawyer and me coming out a lower risk unfilmables.
This is a really great place tohave sex because that's not talking as the writer to the reader.
It's actually talking about the location that you're describing, and it's doing it in an unfilmables away because in that,
not every audience member viewing this house is going to think, Oh, man, that is a really great place to have sex, but it is doing a whole lot of efficient writing.
It isn't unfilmables, but it is efficiently a describing the location that we're seeing on DH B.
It is efficiently conveying the tone off the movie that we're watching now. This is, as we said, seen forty nine. So not that early in the script.
But a lot of what these unfilmables do is convey tone.
It's how the reader should experience the film in the same way that it has that great.
I'm not sure if it's Ah, saxophone, but that great theme to it.
Background Music
If that little grace note that sort of comedic theme played that would tell the audience, Oh, this is funny.
This is up for a laugh. This is a This is the feeling of this film and that second line. This is a really great place to have. Sex is directly tapping into that.
Whereas the aside, the kind of house that I'll buy if this movie is a huge hit is much less.
It's about giving a laugh right? But it actually communicates, particularly to the audience of this script, which is film executives, and it's Beverly Hills home probably gives them a lot because they know exactly the kind of ostentatious house you're talking about.
The thing is, that's not the only part of the description it actually gives a scene description on. This is something that will get into it is what I call a framing device, right?
Which is it frames how you interpret the rest off the description, right? It gives it some personality.
And to your point, we would be treating this example very differently if all it said is the kind of house that I'll buy.
If this movie is a huge hit full stop and didn't then go on to paint more of an actual picture through film a bles chrome glass carved wood plus an outdoor solarium.
But then the button on that descriptor being this film a ble unfilmables this tone tonal experience.
That's a classic example, not just because it's speaking directly to the reader, but it's speaking as the writer. It's commentary from the writer. It's breaking the fourth wall.
But what makes it work is that it sets a tone that then frames in the actual description, which it still gives right, and then it ends it with the punch line that is a tonal punch line.
But I could see this also being given to crew, and they're just thinking like we just need you to find a house, which is a really great place to have sex, right?
And the production is owner and the location manager and all that stuff will be like Fuck yeah, it gets their imaginations running wild.
It's not micromanaging them, but it's letting them use their imagination.
And I think that's also what makes it effective. Is it? Actually, this is something I'm going now Realise they talk about these film ls.
It engages you to create and to generate and to use your brain, imagining it,
right and sometimes the danger of micromanaging is it actually causes you to disengage because it's giving you too much information and in fact, what you want to do has have the reader fill in the blanks, and that's actually what gets them to engage in the material.
Yeah, I think that's an excellent early observation. Well, then I meant to cover this off in the intro.
We're done here way don't enter to anyone.
But one of the things that we in choosing our homework, we tried to look for specs where the market has decided that these unfilmables were actually not just allowable, but actually off value.
What I mean by Specs is scripts that were not commissioned right non commission property, not up s o where you work on someone else's franchise.
No. One where you've been hired by a producer but material that's been written by writers on, then bought by producers ideally, not overly developed, right?
So that's what we mean by speaking this concept rather than my offhand joke about. It's always suspect until it's Greenlee.
That's that might be the president reality.
But I think specifically what we're looking for is the scripts that people regiment. This is fucking amazing. I'm spending money on this.
Yeah, and the other thing that we tried to avoid but often failed is too avoid scripts by writer directors,
because they have a very different set of objectives in their writing.
And also the market expectations. So in the context of a writer director selling a speck, people might be like,
I didn't fully understand how you pulled this off, but I trust that you will pull this off, or I could just have a conversation with you as the director, though to be said, I've had a conversation on a script that I was riding, not directing with the producer and one of the production executives.
How about us as the riders conceived of shooting a scene to keep it cheap, and then we kind of had to write that in a little bit because it was like, we are only ever inside the car.
And when we've cut, like because it was a car crash, a fiery car crash, It was like we had then write in specifically, this's actually related to unfilmables.
We had to write in. We only ever see this inside the car flashes from the outside, and then we had to write, like, cut to black and then go to the wide.
And so they had an understanding of how they could shoot it cheaply because there are imagining it being like some kind of fucking drone, you know, imagining it being some kind of like wide shot with the car racing in and crashing in something, whereas we will like No, it's in close and dirty, you know.
And the other reason well, the other reason the in particular was trying to avoid writer directors is because we did a podcast on Quentin Tarantino and Quentin Tarantino. Listen to it on DH.
You know, we we're criticising some of his use of unfilmables, and I say we I think it was probably May.
And he said, I'm writing a novel for me to interpret on Set.
And you know, that's the luxury of being a writer director is you don't actually have to unnecessarily adhere to the same constraints as a speck writer or just a writer who's not the director.
You're not running for the director where there is a category that we're talking about crew. But the crew includes the director.
Yeah, but I want to say that even for a writer director there, script still have to be communication tools, right? Like this is going to sound obvious to anyone who's actually worked on a produced film.
But, you know, no. Well, I don't know.
Let's sound safe Slug.
I didn't mean it to sound smug. I didn't quite quiet.
So how do you know about this jazz? Now? That sounds like.
The broad point is, you know, actors have to want Teo come onboard Your film crew have to understand,
broadly what the production design, the tone, mood theme, etcetera, etcetera.
Now, a lot of that doesn't have to be communicated necessarily through the script, but it helps if it does anyway.
So. A recent example off the climb Specs script that you're talking about is YOUR BRIDESMAID IS A BITCH.
Yes, we say recent. It was on the two thousand ten Black list, and I was lucky enough to see the blacklist as an organisation do a live reading of this script.
And there was one particular line from the script that stood out to me as a complete unfilmables that would never It was really the writer talking to the reader because,
there was so little way of the audience or,
the characters accessing what was written.
Now I also want to say that you and I generally try and steer away from doing unproduced material because we don't ever want to,
be seen to be screenplay reviewers or, you know, yes, do thanks.
Douchebags basis.
But Brian Duffield was one of those kind of famous spec writers who actually launched his career on specs before he got studio,
Giggs and got a writing career like I think he was on the Black list three years in a row, all with Specs so that this script has not been produced, although it's still listed as in development on I Am D B.
But it's a romantic comedy, and here is the moment.
It's the Kiss, the one that wins MTV Best Kiss awards, because it turned on so many teens that approximately five thousand babies were born as a result and twice as many abortions had where ends Noah is rightfully speechless.
Now that unfilmables is such an aside to the audience, and it's a joke in the script.
Such aside to the Rita.
Sorry to the Read it. Yes, correct. Thank you. It's such an upside to the reader, and it's a joke that,
no matter how slow mo or how much eighties music you have behind this kiss on, how much fucking glory lighting or stockings over the lens you're never going to get,
you know, five thousand babies born and twice a cz many abortions on DH, and that line is funny.
Well, you could do any flash quick, quick guards like there is a really fourth wall breaking version.
I'm just laying the idea of being on families absorbed. There is a fourth wall version of this film that is literally like you see the kiss cut to them winning Thie Award cut Teo like digit in a whole bunch of you know, they could do it in Rick and Morty, right?
Yeah, they like wreck Ahmadi. And before that, you know scrubs or five hundred days of summer, or you're going back to Shane Black Kiss, kiss, bang, bang! Where you freeze frame what you're seeing And then you talk about it.
Yes, there is a way that they could have made that joke film a ble, But it's not in this spec.
Because it's not. And it's actually telling you the script is telling you that they don't want you to shoot it for real.
Yes, yes.
Like if they wanted to do that joke, it would have been like seen headings because that's communication. What? The script, by making it an aside, is telling you, I don't want you to shoot this. I just wanted to be, ah, hot as fuck Kiss.
Yeah, Exactly. And the reason why I reacted.
I reacted to it in the live read and I still react to it the same way, whereas me laughing at this joke when I was If I will watching this film and imagining it, I would not be laughing at that moment.
So the reason why I reacted against this aside is because it's actually creating a different experience to what the viewer would end up experience.
What this is actually giving the reader permission to do is imagine that kiss, right? It doesn't have to give you the specifics.
It's actually getting you to use your juices. So you're actively engaging in the material, imagining what you think is the best MTV winning kiss, Which is great, because what I might imagine is the MTV winning kiss.
It could be very different from your little peck on the cheek jazz. So.
Mine would be much less Harry.
Oh, I thought you're going to say I was going to be in it. But you know.
After you shaves you.
S so yes, I think this actually, it does it right. So is that we think that they're using it.
It both feels this actually doesn't feel specific or clarifying as some of the other examples that will use.
But it definitely like the first one gets you to actively imagine the most horrible thing you can.
And I've seen this in the quiet place. One will talk to it, actually talks aboutthe shrieks of the monsters and actually says the most horrifying sound. You, Khun, actually even says most harping sound. You can imagine it wasn't in our unfilmables list, but it's the same.
It's actually the same idea. It's getting you tow. Actively engage.
Well, it's making you take the position. Not as a reader, but as a viewer in a weird kind of way.
Yes, it's making you use your imagination, your viewing it in your.
Yeah, yeah, exactly. It's making you think of What does that sound like to me? And suddenly you're looking at it. You're seeing it. You're hearing it. You're feeling it.
So yes. Look, one of the reasons why we decided to include YOUR BRIDESMAID IS A BITCH despite it being unproduced is because this speck clearly contributed to Brian De Fields career.
And it's quite in comparison, de LETHAL WEAPON. It's a much more recent spec, and it while it may not have gotten produced, it shows what, in two thousand ten you could get away with it, not only get away with it, actually, you know,
get heat under your career.
Here's the line outside. Here's the line from a quiet place the most, and it's in bold. The most immediate and terrifying combination of sound one could ever imagine doesn't use you.
It could have spoken more directed to the reader that they've made their choice for whatever reason, but again forces you to engage right on DH. It doesn't smack you as being an unfilmables, but lack. It's both specifically in specific.
Yeah, maybe that's what a lot of these unfilmables are because I think what we'll get to is that they are actually Mohr accurately conveying the experience of watching the film than,
writing out what you actually see or hear.
Yeah, I mean, how do you actually explain what the terror it sounds like a crew means a penguin. You're like, really,
right. But it lets everyone crew ria not the audience, but the crew and the rear use their imagination. It's actually not for the audience, because the crew will interpret that and then put it on screen, saying, With that kiss, that's for the actors.
They get to imagine what's the coolest, sexiest thing right?
You're actually inviting them to bring their own context to it, where if you were more specific, you would be denying that context.
You make it universal. In a way, it's specifically universal.
Yes.
I guess maybe, is that it does not make sense better than in specifically in specific.
It's an oxymoron, but it does make sense anyway.
The final aside that we're going to do before we dive into the Maur specific sort of categories of unfilmables wass on example of,
almost an example of we see on DH, I'll refer you to script notes and Craig Mazen Teo argue.
How we see is perfectly appropriate in any reader who tells you otherwise is an idiot.
So we're looking at HEREDITARY.
You know you were her favourite. Who's going to take care of you when you die?
She isn't born. Ah, Favourite. I swear I can feel them in the roof. You were her favourite.
It's a moment where it's a bit of set up for a big A syriza big plot reveals later on in the film.
And it's where Peter is driving his sister Charlie to a party.
They're on a road on DH.
We'll get this script except first, and then I'll talk about how it was actually shot in the film.
The car passes a telephone pole just on average telephone pole, but we hold on it for a second longer than feels necessary. Hyper attentive viewers might notice that a small schedule has been carved into it.
And that's the end of it. You know, it's saying we it's putting the reader in the place of the viewer, And it is, you know, giving the reader ah, lot more time than the eventual viewer would have to digest and notice.
This, like the italics, is drawing the reader's attention to it in a way that the writing off it itself is suggesting that the eventual viewer might not, because it's only hyper attentive viewers that might notice.
But the reason I love this is what it's saying is that you want almost everyone to notice it, but you want them to feel smart for noticing it. That's the challenge for the crew, right?
Yes, so I saw it before reading this, and they do a lot Mohr than just hold on it as the car passes.
It's almost like a whip pan following the car, and it stops with the telephone pole dead centre and lets the Carly frame.
And if you're watching this on YouTube, you will have just seen that s o the s'more than just hyper attentive viewers.
It's still in a wide, distant shot, but like you said, I didn't get to analyse it long enough.
I haven't freeze framed it, but there's probably some focus and some lighting that does draw the eye to this middle of this frame that is being held on whether sigil is there.
What I'll say in getting its HEREDITARY as an example a few times is because horror films are very cinematically driven right?
I'm by far not the first person to make this observation.
But, you know, horror films require directors to really understand and be able to manipulate their audience rights.
When you're riding that script trying to create that feeling of a really good horror film, you're trying to recreate these techniques of, like the the thumb bling drone, the darkness that all those kinds of,
tools that that the filmmakers have at their disposal when making the film and trying to replicate that on the prey.
JJ to me, HEREDITARY is really interesting read because of how much it kind of speaks to those techniques in these kinds of asides and a little bit further on, and this is related to a side.
But I think they're actually really useful because they talk about plot information not being necessary for communicating unfilmables.
But it actually kind of does in the HEREDITARY big print used these kinds of asides, quite literally in in perent parenthetical sze in big print,
to remind the reader in the same way that the audience will recognise things, so there's an example off.
It's basically when any comes to Jones apartment, where they've been having assailants, and she's like knocking on the door so any any is knocking on the door.
And then we cut to the inside while Annie's on the outside.
So it's the camera being omniscient. So it's thie audiences Voya, which is separate from the characters, which is an important aspect of horror films.
Background Music
Interior Jones apartment continuous. Nobody's home.
We're pulling back from the door as Annie's knocking persists to reveal the apartment.
It looks mostly the same, but it's now adorned in cloths and drapes that feature various symbols. One of these is an ornate sigil, which we recognise as the one on Anne's neck lace.
This is the sigil of payment, and it can now be found all over the room.
The table at which Anne and Joan performed the sounds, which was then covered in a tablecloth, is now bear, revealing that the table top has a large triangle carved into it, pointing to the north west.
Resting in the middle of the triangle is a photo of Peter. Besides, Thiss isn't Athen ritual dagger, a scattering of herbs and finally, a primitive dia rama, the same that we saw earlier on Child his desk.
But now finished standing centre stage is a crude mannequin of a human torso whose head is an actual severed rave. In head atop the head is an alum Minion Voil crown.
Three other sculptures bow on their knees to the raven headed figure.
Their heads are the seven pigeon head, now decomposing. A severed rat head, Onda seven's girl, head on his knocking, continues.
Those asides are for the reader, because that stuff would be visually obvious to the audience, right?
Which is that the primitive Dia Rama, and that you'd have that instinctive reaction off all its We've seen this, but it's now finished.
But if you got rid of that aside, a primitive diary finished, we've got no idea. That's the same one that we've seen that these air sciences specifically for the reader tow actually catch them upon to plot information that will be mawr visually obvious.
It's interesting that the thing that you're saying would be the most visually obvious is the thing that I completely didn't get as a viewer like clearly this is playing with point of view.
It's saying, you know, it's revealing information to the audience that the characters are not getting and it's doing that in camera completely film a ble.
What I got when I was watching this film was the second paragraph, which was the table with a large triangle with the picture of Peter in it and that immediately conveyed to me.
This character is up to something. Peter is the target. Something bad is happening.
It then did stay on that showing the different she calls it a primitive dia rama.
I didn't see it as a primitive die rama. I saw it as different things that we'd seen Charlie playing with.
I couldn't see this big picture that the script is so painstakingly painting for the reader.
I just thought oh shit and Charlie was involved as well.
So look, I'm I usually see myself as a pretty attentive but maybe I'm not a hyper attentive viewer of cinema,
but it does go to your point that it's eat much easier to write outs and bits of information because the reader can take more time.
A reader Khun stop and read a script and read the same line again until they get it, whereas a viewer cannot stop or very rarely will press, pause, rewind and rewatch.
I have not made that point while recording. But, yes, that is a point that I talk about the inevitability thie inevitable unfolding of time in cinema.
And this is one of those things where I was taking a lot of the messaging that they're conveying, but not the detail that the writer is conveying here.
My point about these asides, whether or not it translated on screen, is that they've made a decision for the point of clarity, to put as asides to the reader plot information which you everything, he said, was a boo boo.
But they're pointing it out because this stuff, ideally, would be recognisable toe on audience. But it's harder to translate what assiduous a sigil write.
I mentioned a sigil on page ten, and then I mentioned a sigil on page one hundred.
I got no idea if it's the same one, so they have to specifically call our attention to it right?
Or that there's a process that has changed but also signals to the crew that it's important that the audience recognises worst case scenario.
They would have its cheesy as fuck, but like you would go until the ornate sigil on the table, and then you cut to the necklace on any his neck, and then you cut back.
You can make that connexion for the audience if you need to visually, but it's telling the crew what to do. So this is actually us realising that our rule of thumb, what we're saying is like this cannon on ical rule is not true.
And this stripped the HEREDITARY script great because it's got a lot of those little examples off direction on. I'm not saying the script is full of dread. It's not a woman in black.
It's definitely reading a lot more from a writer director's point of view. But lots of really good ways to tell you how the film making is gonna work.
You know, my favourite unfilmables in this sequence is pointing to the North West.
Yet the audience what they want and says a compass.
Yeah, or that there's a compass in the room. Or that even if there was a compass in the room, the fact that is pointing to the North West means fucking anything.
And that doesn't bump me for whatever reason, Mike, it's really important that I know it's the North.
Well, it's one of those details that is telling us it's really important, but we don't know why it's really important.
It's because where it's where Gandalf is going to appear on the On the dawn, the day after with his his recovery.
Okay, so asides were created, example right.
But now we're looking at scenes and sequences, and what we kind of noticed is that the cinematic kind of scenes that we were interested in how the writers wrote tends to happen.
It turning points right openings very important for establishing character, world tone, mood the opening scenes tells you how to read the film, right?
But it also happened at, like, mid points or turning points into the act or climaxes right, because this is stuff that, particularly on screen, is kind of cinematically experience.
I'm not clearly articulating why this is the case, but this is what it kind of felt like, that these films that were looking at used them for those kinds of moments, like it's the ebb and flow of film, right?
But I think it also happens in scenes, and I've talked about many times.
Sean's having mid points, right or a transition, which kind of leads us into what I consider a very simple technique for unfilmables that if you stopped listening after this little bit, you'll actually have hopefully learned a lot.
I'm or conscious of it. I kind of been doing this stuff, but now I'm a lot more aware of it.
Another thing that I would say before we don't jump into. The other examples is that what we found in doing the homework and this one things that I've learned is that it sounds obvious now.
But there's a very distinct categories of when unfilmables can be used.
Framing the scene openings, performance direction, description of the physical on DH, finally ending with sort of grouping together tone, mood and theme.
So framing the same. This actually is going to book and the theme thing appropriately.
What I kind of realised in doing all these examples is there's probably speaking to places that you Khun using unfilmables in May's examples right decides different,
one is that you put it at the beginning or near the beginning of description. Like LETHAL WEAPON.
This's the kind of house that I would buy. When I sell the script, you're framing what people are going to be reading after it. You're telling them how to interpret what they're going to read.
So they read it through that lens, read it within mind.
The other option is to put it at the end. So they re as they read it there, going I'm not sure what this means.
And then you tell them at the end what it means in both cases, you're actually kind of holding the hand of the reader a little bit. You're helping them interpret the material.
Matt doesn't. Well, he does. Listen, my co writing that we had an argument about we want the audience to chew for their mail.
I'm like, Yeah, you want to chew for their mail? You don't want to give them like uncooked food and tell them they're going to cook it themselves.
Right, like a bunch of images on a page with no context is meaningless like. But if you can tie them together with one or two lines to help them understand what to do, then you are cooking it for them and they chew it. They still interpreting it through your lens.
So the example I'm going to use to start with, which is where I became conscious of it because I literally stole it and used it in my script.
Payload is short film, which is Dany Espenson right post about a scene,
from Battlestar Galactica that she wrote, and it's a little blood post to read because she talks about it in the context off parenthetical sze.
But essentially, what she did is that in just tell us what Which episode at one point in the scene, the tone of changes and there at the end of the scene, right?
The climax of the scene is that she poured in a stage direction on the left edge, Grim colon mark a line of dialogue. Keep looking right.
I ended up using any my example. I used the big point of the scene to say that the scene changed from a little bit more light hearted, too grim.
But what she is saying is that you meant to interpret the whole scene. From that point, forward is grim, and presumably that would feed into the scene that it's hooking into.
That's how I read that. If you go, you know, you can see how this is used in an example. Like like a murder mystery, eh? Have you found the girl yet?
Grim, No cut to wide shot people with torches looking through a forest.
You going to interpret the next scene as grim in this, Her specific cases telling how to interpret the line of dialogue on what follows it.
But that also follows for a whole bunch of things. You could just go happy Colon, right?
And it would change is the way you read the dialogue in the big print. After that.
What I want to really say about Jane's block post is she actually says why she put it in what in Australia, we call big print. But what in the US is called action lines?
She puts it in stage direction, not in parent testicles. And she made that as a deliberate choice, and she explains why she made that deliberate choice.
I made it a direction because I wanted it to be bigger than those two words. I wanted to succinctly convey that it wasn't just the tone of one man's voice that grew groom, but rather that the tone of the whole scene changed.
By taking it out of the dialogue and putting it into the stage directions, I made it more inclusive.
It's a neat little trick. Look at the tonal shifts in your script.
Are they at the line level or the scene level? Consider moving your adjectives around appropriately.
I mean, you know, we're doing two hours and that on DH. She's kind of done it in, like, two paragraphs.
So this kind of transitions into kind of the last of these very clear, friendly examples and what is interesting about the example which is from KILLING EVE, is I don't think they did this in the film in the in the pilot episode.
But I read the scene first and then watched, like the first fifteen minutes, and it is very different, but very early on kind that they're kind of describe on ice cream parlour in Berlin.
Interior Berlin Ice cream parlour evening, an old fluorescent light flicks in a small, tired ice cream parlour.
Faded pastel wallpaper and enthusiastic posters exclaimed, flavours in German vanilla.
A few people walked past in the street outside. The vendor, a teenage boy, stands numbly at the counter. A mother and daughter, seven, said by the window. There is an eerie quiet about the scene. Then we see her.
Sitting alone and upright at a small plastic table is a petite, striking, impossibly chic young woman.
Her black hair falls lightly down her back. Her precise yet subtle makeup hardly noticeable, her eyes totally unreadable.
She is impeccable and impenetrable.
Right. It's crating dread. There is eerie quiet. I'm not quite sure what's going on. It makes me feel dread is probably the right word, because I'm not sure this is a horror film, is it?
Is it zit? Supernatural is, but I know something is going to go wrong.
That is what it's telling me. And so I read this whole scene, which is dialogue bliss in that context.
As it turns out, they've played it very differently on screen.
But the fact is, they still wanted to be heightened tonally, and she's written a tone very early on. It's kind of like the first, third, the inciting incident of the scene. It frames the whole scene.
I'd seen it before reading it, whereas you read it before seeing it on DH. The difference to me is I almost scooted straight over that line, almost erasing it as I read it, because I might Well, that doesn't fit.
When I read it, I was like, Don't go what's going? I thought a bomb was going to go off.
I had no idea what was gonna happen. It put me in a Spence, and it's just that, like, if you took it out, I wouldn't have interpreted the scene that way.
And so it's a very simple trick in terms of these very basic unfilmables of how to give you those those scenes of that height and emotion because you can see as a director is an editor.
It's the sanderson of all those things. I don't know how I can make that right. You can even suck all the air out of seen or what they've done is they've taken out all the dietetic sounds.
Almost. There's no at loss. There's no dialogue. There's just very kind of loud sounds of them slipping. And then they paste over this kind of music that kind of like nineteen fifties music kind of stuff, right?
But they're playing Haydn's, and there is a version of that that this that is like a slow track in with just like a rumbling drone.
You know, there are so many different versions that you can create those kinds of moments, and we've seen films. We know what they look like.
That's how you translated onto the page.
You're engaging them. What is an eerie quiet? What does this mean?
You know, So that's what I call a framing device, and we'll see that other script.
So, yes, one of the reasons way we've carved out openings as a separate topic is because your opening is your opportunity to provide that lens through which the readers should experience your project.
They're quite literally framing the whole thing.
Yeah, or the whole Siri's or the whole season, whatever it is, pilot.
And so you're opening, I feel like because of the work it has to do to convey, in addition to the action and characters, which is obviously super important,
tone on DH mood and potentially seating theme as well.
So in a way, I feel like you're openings. You have a lot more luxury to indulge in unfilmables, but also you've got to be careful because you don't want to put readers off Rice from Page one.
You asked me to get somebody that was all right, Russell. He's kind of a wiseass, but he's all right. If you can stand up and a guy like you, you want a job done, you don't have the balls to do it yourself. I think you ought to try pretty hard.
I don't like this guy. He's too fucking fresh for my blood. Russell, will you shut the fuck up and stop jerking? The guy's chain is trying to. What's a favour here? He's trying to be, Oh, I thought he wanted us to do it on my phone.
So there's a good I won't read the hot end up reading the whole page, but we'll put a P F probably should've mentioned the Hopi ng a p A for of all these scenes as a link to them in the show notes.
But there's you're framing devices Don't have to be a short is grim.
There's a great framing device in KILLING THEM SOFTLY, which is a great film by Andrew Dominik.
And look, this comes from a novel. So how much of this is lifted off the novel? I'm not sure which is that sense place.
Exterior city streets, Day America Now a place of economic collapse.
We're hemmed in by wires and poles like the background of a Robert Crumb cartoon. Smokestacks of abandoned industry crumble in the distance.
The sky hangs low and grim over us. Wind born garbage blows through the sullen streets.
America as your noble, a skinny young man in a denim jacket buttoned against the cold wonders through this devastation, taking it all in his abused, sensitive eyes.
So tells us the physical location, the time occasion, but also the emotional location.
If that makes sense, America as.
And then it comes to the character a skinny young man on. Then it mentions the song.
What is doing is it's taking us from the literal what we see into what it means.
So the framing device and this is something cool scene is it's giving us the kind of emotional context at the end.
America as she noble that's an unfilmables right like but is a metaphor, which is actually a really useful thing for making it as if.
But that's a visual ass if you can shoot that.
But it's also plays into a thematic idea. It's for the reader, and it's for the crew.
If the crew do their job, that will come off to the audience.
And you say America, she noble. It's a perfect piece of not just location description, but also theme on DH tone.
But what? I guess it's very followed up in the second line. And as you say, this opening becomes more literal, unless symbolic, Less literary.
But it actually gives us the visual. That's all visual description.
It's actually you could shoot that, but then it's clarified it. America as Chernobyl.
Yeah, well, I would say like it starts with American Now you know, the first two words American Now that could be followed on by anything but the fact that it says America now a place of economic collapse.
It is telling us this is the political view off this writer as toe what America is on, what the world off, America that our characters inhabit.
Yeah, but it's the same sandwich structure. Is LETHAL WEAPON kind of like poetic description, visual poetic description, and you will see this pattern again. This sandwich better.
Yes, yes, yes, yeah, I would say,
is beautiful character description. The very next line is a skinny young man in a denim jacket buttoned against the cold wonders through this devastation, taking it all in with his abused, sensitive eyes.
Now it's very poetic, very beautiful. How do you tell us that his eyes air abused and sensitive? It is a complete unfilmables, but it ends up being very film. A ble.
Well, it also clarifies it further this is Frankie Strangely Sweden Innocents, a born victim, character introductions of frame devices for everything that we interpreted that character from then on in terms of Frankie a born victim.
Fuck, we know those people, right?
Yes.
And then it mentions the song and includes the lyrics and all that stuff.
That's kind of all. I wanted to dwell on that because it's using that same sandwich or Hamburg, A structure as LETHAL WEAPON and it frames everything else.
And I think that is something that, like, Yeah, I am one of those people that things with screenwriting we should approach it like Great, You know that once he used to do when you're teaching art that you would copy that's how painters learn.
They could meet other painters, like sit there and make it like great artists steal because they take something from Ellis and they make it their own.
But that's what I'm trying to point out in detail. But it's in stark contrast to the HEREDITARY, which is not poetic.
It's this little bit more verbatim or exact riding style, right, like KILLING THEM SOFTLY. That's literary writing.
That's for the reader. America Schauble is for the reader. That's not dramatic. It has no impact on the characters, its tone and mood. HEREDITARY isn't.
It's heartening to see so many strange new faces here today. I know my mom would be very touched and probably a little suspicious.
So again, as with a lot of these examples, you read them first, and I saw them first and I saw HEREDITARY, and I'm like, I want to see how that opening was written on the page.
And as you'll hear Korisa read, what is written on the page is very matter of fact and very descriptive, which is perfect for cinematographer and a production designer,
and there's almost no unfilmables in there at all.
Yeah, Okay. You know, you're right. There is actually no unfilmables. The reason I wanted to bring it up because of the use of Wei and because I think, I guess, maybe unfairly in my brain. I lumped the use of way with unfilmables, and they're kind of a separate issue.
But for me, the truth of cinema is that the audience exists.
Has a point of view in cinema separate from the characters, right?
The camera is our eyes and quite literally, what it's in and out off the frame is us.
And our experience and horror films is the very effectively the camera is we right?
The camera is the way in horror films, that sense of voyeurism that you often get.
And it's not just for terrorism that sometimes that inescapable feeling, that slow pushing and you want to look away and you can't,
right That is the way of the camera and HEREDITARY uses that, and reminds us that we are present in this film separate from the characters were quite literally experienced.
The film on a literary level, that is, that is what is it, it's saying And you said that when you read this it didn't have any of the dread of the opening.
I guess for me when I read it because I knew was the horror film on you was one of the most scary horror films.
That's part of the reason I read it before watching it.
But I came into it going on where you're doing the quite slow creep, and it probably doesn't have quite the same unsettling feeling at all.
On the other hand, I kind of knew what they're trying to do.
Interior Workshop morning, an impressive room serving as an artist's workshop.
It's empty, but evidence of frantic creative activity abounds.
We pan across the wall, crossing a syriza. Meticulously handcrafted doll houses mostly works in progress.
As we drift past these unfinished die, Rama's trajectory becomes clearer.
We're moving in on extraordinary sculpture of a beautiful rustic craftsman home.
At one eighth scale, its front wall has been removed, exposing its rooms in graphic tableau.
This huge miniature is painstakingly detailed, is adorned with shrunken props, slash decorations,
flashlights, pill bottles, shoes, et cetera and teeny furniture, all flawlessly rendered and distinguishable E only in size from their full scale models.
We continue to pan slash track across the miniature, edging closer and closer. As we drift along its tiny rooms, we finally arrive at a miniature replica of a teenage boy's bedroom on the second floor.
We pushed towards this until the room fills the frame. The bright morning sun beams in through its window.
It becomes apparent that a handsome, skinny boy is sleeping in the bed.
This is Peter Graham, seventeen.
We continue pushing gently in remaining in a wide of the room whose status as a miniature has now been confused.
The door opens, and Steve Graham, forty seven tall, broad shouldered formal, pops his head in. He wears a black suit.
The only unfilmables that's in this description, which is a perfect unfilmables because it's exactly captures what the audience feeling is when watching it is,
whose status as a miniature has now been confused.
So it's saying that we now can't tell as a viewer of thiss film, whether we're watching a miniature that's come tto life or if it's really life or with we've moved transition from the miniature.
It's articulating how the audience feels when watching this, which is amazing.
Now the only reason why I kind of rallied against this as not a great example of unfilmables is because it's such a matter of fact description off this off.
What we're seeing it is so perfectly adhering to show don't tell, Don't use unfilmables,
that none of the tone of this comes across this description off miniatures on an artist workshop.
It could be a comedy. It could be a romcom. It could be a drama we don't know yet, whereas when you're watching that film the music you are under no delusion.
Background Music
As to how creepy this feels.
But reading it, none of that tension or creepiness was that.
They could have ridden in a framing device. It's something about creepy, right?
They could have, or a tone.
And it would have changed the interpret a tonal line, that kind of frames all that.
You know, I agree with that. It is very matter of fact. I agree with all of it, I guess.
In terms of the unfilmables. And I read HEREDITARY, Azzam mentioned earlier, it changed how we're writing this Horace script.
Part of it was being conscious of the wee wee linger on this. We hold a lot of that and we changed our writing just on those little horror moments.
We hold on this a little longer than necessary just to elevate the horror.
You know, you could even white a line instead of just saying we pan off.
You know there's that great shot from Taxi Driver, just one of my favourite films and it za film that's really important to me creatively.
Remember seeing how Scorsese used the camera in Taxi Driver?
I'm like Holy shit! I've never imagined you could move the camera separate from the characters. It's a non dramatic withers there, shot when he's on the phone in Taxi Driver and the camera just dollies off him right.
Remember that when he's calling her and Dolly's off him and then it waits, we finish the conversation, walks back into frame.
You could describe it exactly how I did that, that verbatim, matter of fact style.
Or you could write something like We pan away from Travis Bickle no longer be able to, you know it's too painful to watch that, too.
May is how I would write it now, because that's the emotional experience.
But it's also reminding that we're watching him, and that gives you for me, for me as a writer, that kind of writing gives me the experience of the audience, which is I am watching him.
No longer want to watch him, and that's why I think this this scene from HEREDITARY is a good example of it.
There's other examples, like hyper attentive viewers, but there's other moments of way we linger on it a little bit longer than seems necessary that are quote unquote unfilmables. Their commentary there, editorialising from the rhino there, directing from the page.
But they re create the cinematic experience of an audience, which is that you are an active participant,
but also passively an active participant if you get me, that's the experience of horror, right that we are actively involved through the camera and the sound design in what's going on.
We are an active participant in that we are a voyeur, but we're also passively constrained to it. We cannot look away.
Yes. Yeah, I'm with you. I'm fully on board.
You're right, like there is no tonal reference in here it all and reading it now.
Not at the time that I read it, I'm like it could be a comedy. Your observation is completely correct, right?
And I think if I was writing this a suspect script, I mean, this is a conjecture of the film was made. The guy's clearly a directorial genius, but I would have ridden in If it was May I would have been a total loss.
Yeah, well, let's do it. The opening ofthe SHARP OBJECTS where you can feel tone through just plain description.
Yeah, it doesn't have a framing line, does it? It's kind of just ebbs in and out.
Exterior Wind gap, Missouri, nineteen ninety four Main St day Population. Two thousand flat and dry as a cracked boot heel.
There are better and bad neighbourhoods, a little of both represented here in the town's main commercial strip.
The street is lined with aged brick buildings and weathered shops. Nothing new built in this part of town for some time. You'd never know. The year two thousand is looming.
It's hot. People move slowly, tending to errands or going from work to someplace else.
Laughter cuts through the stillness like cool, fresh air. Two young girls, Kamil and marry in pre K.
I just read this in, like this is,
get out.
On DH. That's and that's the point, you know, like that first line flattened dries a cracked heel boot.
And then you never know that the year two thousands looming laughter cuts through the stillness like cool fresh air to young girls like that is telling us these lines there, obviously they're a unfilmables because they were filmed.
But it is not describing in that exact Mamet hyper present way what we're seeing on screen, it is actually telling us the feeling of what we're seeing on screen.
Very yeah, very little of it is actually description of what we're seeing.
You know, there's the only things I would say is actual description is in the third paragraph. The street is lined with age brick buildings and weathered shops. Nothing new built in this part of town for some time.
Everything else is feeling and tone.
It's not as specific, but it's still visual, but it moves even. That third paragraph street is lined with age big buildings and weathered shops. Nothing new built in this part of town for some time.
You never know the two thousand swimming a little bit of a visual.
Ah, lot of feeling the limit of of all feeling and then a visual. It's hot is a feeling people move slowly like I mean, they could shoot it on long lens and you get that kind of heat distortion.
Yes.
You know, that kind of really, Tony Scott. I don't think that's how they shot it.
That Tony Scottsdale What low to the ground, The heat ways through it, Shima, right? But then it goes from that feeling. It's hot to the visual description. People move slowly tending to her errands.
This is something that almost all these scripts that I think are effective for me do they give you feeling and visual or visual and feeling or hamburger, you know, is either an open sandwich cart, close damage.
This is a perfect example of what you're saying about imagination. What this writing is doing is being universally specific.
Enough Vocativ.
It's not telling you exactly what you're seeing on screen, but it is telling you exactly how to conjure the image in your brain.
It's inviting the audience to fill that gap with their imagination. Sorry, audience wrong with the reader to fill that gap in with their own context and their own experience of what old and good and bad neighbourhoods look like.
So what, this is, I think going to be one of my concluding observations is what Mighty Knox has done here is she has used unfilmables tow actually right Mohr efficiently, then using film a bles.
She has been mohr accurate. Mohr precise, conjured up a better image using unfilmables than actually telling us exactly what the camera is seeing.
It's still and dark in the house. A clock ticks.
Background Music
Kamil gingerly pushes the screen door open. The girls enter on exaggerated tiptoes, enjoying the drama of it.
Then the sound of ice in the glass movement. From the kitchen, the girl's freeze and through doorway we see the silhouette of Adora thirties.
Even from this dim vantage point, we can tell this is the sort of woman who refuses to perspire.
Her dresses crisp, her hair perfectly done, Kamil and marry in exchange panicked glances, then hit the stairs and silently escaped to the second floor, unnoticed interior.
Prego home hallway day marrying is covering her mouth, stifling laughter.
Kamil quietly, Shashi is her in Leeds. Marry into her room.
She opens the door into interior bedroom.
Present St Louis Day Mills room twenty years later in a different city.
But the girls remain as we've seen them. Stepping out of the past.
The room is still sparse, an old building with elegant mouldings and windows etcetera.
But the furniture is limited to essentials and the walls almost bare.
There's a mattress on a cheap frame in the middle of the room.
A sleeping figure breathes heavily shrouded in blankets the girl's creep across the floor.
Kamil transfixed, gazes of the vulnerable person on the bed.
Thie Babers, Abbas, she's been holding, slipped from her hand, Fall to the floor.
Then Camille spies a woman's bare arm extending from under the covers.
She nears it. I's it hungrily close on, Kamil as she bites the arm, hard teeth sinking into flesh and adult Kamil,
gasping, eyes flying open, woken from semi oblivion, she sits dressed in a long sleeved thermal no bite there.
I mean, her character script. Shins are amazing, you know.
Yes. A little closer to cheating, but yes.
Character introductions. Communal twelve is sweet and spindly, or elbows and angles.
S o that sari, the one that I thought was cheating was they see a silhouette of the mother character, Adora, and just a silhouette on DH.
You're right. That's like even from we can tell. And it's like, Well, I don't Yeah, that becomes a little.
From a silhouette. I can tell there is a woman who refuses to pay.
It's a great character description because it's X, and we're going to perform speeds that is very playable to an active raided a home, a woman who refuses to pass by. I got that on DH. Then they take that unfilmables.
No, we're not talking about character introductions in this episode, but they take the quote unquote unfilmables.
The poet description ofthe woman refuses, perspire, ending uses visual context addresses Crisp who hair perfectly done,
like it wouldn't have worked as effectively if it didn't have the woman who refuses to best buy and only describe how she looked.
And if you took away the way she looked and didn't give the poetic description, like if you only have the poetic description of how she looked again, it's the combination of both.
That I think is so effective and you only need little because it's like that's what makes you conjure.
It's enough specific e that you kind of points you in the right direction, and then it gives you something that makes your imagination run wild.
Okay, so there's a little bit of a p s with the SHARP OBJECTS script here because it doesn't really fit in one of these categories, but it shows you how good the writing is, translating cinematic ideas to the page.
That is the transition. That is kind of the button on this cold open right, which is when we fast forward to twenty years later.
But it doesn't do text other than admiring the writing, because what's a beautiful about it, right?
Is it it It transition us into the present.
The reason why we wanted to do this PS on this particular script in this particular moment is because it is one of those things that would work,
communicate so clearly visually toe in audience that they wouldn't need explaining but would be so hard to communicate on the page.
And yet Marti Noxon has done it in two lines.
They're these two girls who are back in time there in the nineties, they opened the door into meals room twenty years later in a different city. Yes.
In present and it actually cleverly president's involved.
On the girls remain in caps as we've seen them, and it's stuff that you could do with sound design, with production design, with even colour grading.
You know, I haven't seen it, but I'd imagine it could go from a sort of warming flashback to a much colder blue present, right, And then she used the word stepping out off the past.
And that's something that you, Khun, due in cinema, visually conveyed to an audience that would be so hard to do on the page, and she's done it in two lines.
Because she hasn't tried to have a literal or a matter of fact or a verbatim explanation of it.
She's told us the feeling, and she's remind us off the camera.
That's what's interesting. I don't think she's used away yet butts here.
But the girls remain as we've seen them reminding us that way. Our viewers here and they step out of the past into this room.
Yes, anyway, in stark contrast to the poetic opening of SHARP OBJECTS is,
David Mamet, right only action drama action drama Action.
Angle, angle, angle way Don't even have tto really get garrison to read anything. Now.
Where's the girl? So we believe she was abducted that she was taken to a bordello in Boston. She may have been delivered for sale. Sent down the pipeline overseas to get to her father.
What do they do when they realise who they took killer?
I really love SPARTAN. You know, there's a great line from spine and about, you know, you don't teach him in night finding you teach a man to kill That way he comes up against some, you know, some asshole that study knife fighting.
You send that man straight to hell. Like is a cool fell, right? Like in terms of that really street back him trying to with conspiracy thriller.
Great. So I was really interested in reading the script and I found it really difficult to pass as into interpret and follow. Like, where is that?
We know I saw SHARP OBJECTS in Read the scripture like this is amazing, right?
I read this in the car because I mean, just listen to the first power.
Fade. In exterior, wooded hillside day, we see the drawn face of a young woman camera tracks with her.
As she runs through the thick woods, she is exerting herself heavily As she moves up a steep hillside, She looks behind her quickly and continues angle. We see a young man and then another running through the woods out of breath.
They addressed in filthy BD Use and show several days growth of beard.
The leader stops for a moment and looks around. Two men separate,
angle. The young woman who has come to a small ledge over a ravine.
She stops panting and Ben's overto attempt to catch her breath.
She looks around and looks back, her back to a steep wall, a steep drop before her.
Like this is absolutely only telling us what we see and we hear. Plus, there's this emphasis on angle.
It's even telling us less than what we see. When I see that woman in SPARTAN, I would actually see ah lot Mohr than drawn right.
I would see what she's wearing. I would see whether what colour hair was, whether her hair was done or not. I would see whether she was sweating or not like.
And this is obviously the limitation between script in screen. Like when you see stuff you are absorbing so much more information than what you can possibly read.
But it Hey, ma'am, it is being deliberately spots in his or deliberately verbatim ous you would like to go it.
The sparse is perhaps an even better description because it's not for bait him because it is giving us less information is literally action.
It's action, dialogue and camera. It's not even giving us many complicated camera moves. Is this one from the the button of the scene that we're looking at, which is in front of the sign? So it describes the signs.
There's these moments of like, Let's have assignment gives us kind of this information about this training facility.
Ah, large hand painted sign hangs on the cinder block wall of the rough building. It reads. These are the precincts of pain. Ah, goddess lives here. Her name is Victory.
In front of the sign walks the young woman we saw earlier. She is exhausted. She has a towel wrapped around her neck. Camera takes her to Scott, who was holding a cup of coffee and making notes in the small notebook we saw earlier.
She is exhausted. This is much kind of like fancy pants performance writing his Mamet gets in here.
Camera takes her to Scott. That's it. Hold on, Scott for a moment's like another earlier one like is other than angle and these moments of hold or camera finds it really doesn't even talk about the camera work.
That much foreground background, very simple, is actually right.
Thiss writing style is very SPARTAN, and even if you dropped the angle stuff like, I don't think it's even necessary. Like it's a new fucking paragraph. We don't need angle. We see a young man like just do we say, Young man, ignoring that e.
I mean, who am I to tell David Mamet what to do?
But it is actually just all action.
It's the description of the action, which is instruct Construct ahead a tree.
It doesn't create the feeling because this is actually really tense opening because you don't know what's going on and you are interpreting the performances in different ways.
But I guess Mamet's point is that the job of the rider is to write the action, and if it works in that context, then it will work once you add all the other stuff on is kind of his school of filmmaking, right?
It's the opposite of writing the experience. It's right the drama.
Yeah, and we've raised it as an example here to just go just show like Mabbutt is writing for himself as a director in this case.
But it is to say there is a different style on a different approach, which conveys no tone, no character, no theme, not even what you are seeing on screen.
It is just pure action, and Mamet has that famous line about drama is action.
Yeah, and his dialogues. All action. It's great. I mean, I mean, hopefully recommend the movie. But the reed is interesting for that.
I wouldn't not right on this style, because I it doesn't give me enough. It doesn't give me.
I even in his directorial style, is pretty sparse.
But this is even sparser, right? Like in terms of a read, because it is not trying to fill in the gaps of performance or wardrobe or music, right?
I mean, these use of music is very eternal. I mean, the questions we get to kind of like fancy description like this is our introduction. Tow our protagonist.
Standing here, we discover Robert Scott. He is somewhat older than the two men. He is very fit. Also dressed in filthy Bt use. He is making a note in a small notebook, which he closes.
What they like. That tells us nothing. It doesn't tell us that it's going.
You make Van Kilmer's greatest performance of his entire career.
Next. Oh, you know, gay Pierre.
Well, bad mark again.
Okay, well, yeah, well, it's pretty much like spying on willow and kiss. Kiss, bang, bang. You're kind of like the Van Kilmer.
Top secret riel genius. I may be betraying my man crush on Val Kilmer here.
No, no.
You're teaching Your young surgeon edged weapons fighting. You teach him? They fading. Teach him to kill where they meet. Some son of a bitch studied, named fading. They send his soul to hell.
So that was openings on DH.
One of the guests pitfalls we've tried to avoid in this already over long episode is talking too much about stuff.
And I know that you could probably talk for a whole episode about how to write actor's performance or characters expression as communicated to actors on the page.
And we could do that as a whole episode. But it is a subcategory off unfilmables that we wanted to just deal with briefly here.
One of the questions that we had from an audience, one of our listeners and this is kind of leading into us was, How do you write characters realising stuff on the page and my smile. Last comment was you right?
They have a realisation like, I know how you can write realising is there right dialogue?
In parenthetical realising.
Because there is actually a cinematic language for that. Often what it is is like a push in with music, right?
We know those moments, right? But you could If you're you're bue HEREDITARY guy, you might write. We push in to be curious to see what David Mamet would write.
He would probably know. You probably have a line of dialogue. Yeah, angle on.
Angle on.
But it was weird example that pulled it out. But Emily Blunt, trunk detective, otherwise known as the Girl on the train, has a couple of good examples right of realisation in terms of how to run in the print.
I saw her from the train.
So as we will learn, Rachel, played by Emily Bump, is an alcoholic, and there's a scene early on where she's on a train and she's interacting with ah woman who's asking her.
He's got a little boy wants to basically sit next to Rachel, and there's a moment that's kind of the button on the scene where Rachel's kind of interacting with the boy.
Rachel softly squeezes the boy's hand and giggles.
The woman begins to pick up on Rachel slurred speech and notices to little empty vodka bottles at the mouth of Rachel's purse.
Rachel realises the woman knows she is drunk. The woman repositions her child away from Rachel Close on. Rachel's eyes bleary blink in slow motion.
Rachel, now seated alone, drinks from her square bottle.
What's interesting about this little bait is it tells us that she's having a realisation, right?
It's a performance, but it tells the actor, You have to understand this. But there's also an action that corresponds to it, which is the woman, not Rachel.
But there is still an action again, this sandwich strategy.
And then it also adds a bit of character script camera description, which potentially unnecessary her blinking in slow motion. And then it ends with an image. Rachel, now seated alone, drinks from a squirt bottle.
That's how they really her realisation.
They're telling us that she's realising something, and there is a consequence to that. Realisation is still in action, right? There is a version of this which is just, she realises the warren that knows she's drunk, but that says that suggests nothing to the character. What does her realising mean? Anything.
What it's important is that her drinking is affecting her life and how others behaviour.
Normally that let's remove the unfilmable where the woman realises that she's drunk, right? That's right.
Well, Well, where Rachel realises that the other character realises something.
Well, it's also both right because they could have described it in Mamet's sense like angle on woman's eyes. Angle on bottles in purse.
Woman moves child away. You could do that. We're just seeing what is seen on screen.
And yet you read both versions of that and you're actually writing a worse version on the page. By not using the short hands off, a character realises something without writing the performance, be.
Background Music
The micromanaging what we're seeing.
Without quote unquote directing from the page.
Yeah, and look, they use the same technique in a little bit scene later on twenty five, which is.
She catches a horrific sight in the mirror. Across the room. It's a woman with large streaks of dried blood smeared down her face, staring back at her. Rachel realises she is looking at herself.
Smash cut to interior Rachel's bathroom. Seconds later, Rachel frantically washes the blood from her face.
The same thing. She realises there's a realisation, and then there is an action in response to the realisation, so it is dramatised.
But as you say, it is not micromanaging. Her eyes go wide or close up on blah, blah, blah.
It's just telling us what the act is going to do, and therefore we use our own imagination.
It's the same. It's the same strategy.
The other thing thiss script does is a lot of the realisations that are related to Emily Blunt.
Drunk Detecting is using flashbacks, and it's simple Is that that's how you make it film Mobile instead of like Rachel realises that this reminds her of the thing. It's Rachel Blah Flashback.
Rachel Blur Consequence.
You know, it's that structure. It's really simple stuff when you actually see it presented on the page.
But sometimes, if you haven't seen it presented on the page, it's hard to know how to do it.
On. I think what we're getting to is often you could take your unfilmables and make it feel mobile.
You could write out the flashback. You could write what they're reminiscing about. You could write out all the shots exactly as they're portrayed on camera on.
Often that will make the read worse, and it will also blow your script out to two hundred pages when that's not what is communicated Mohr efficiently on screen.
And you're also beating to tell people what to do, and it can also become monotonous. I've read some of those scripts that are, like one shot at a time per line, tryingto like that hyper present tense style, which I'm an advocate for in certain sequences.
But it could become so monotonous by like page thirty like y o ur reining in scent single line sentences.
So this leads us to FLEABAG.
You know that feeling when a guy you like sends your taxes to clock on a Tuesday night asking if he can come and find you.
Like you always got me coming over.
Hey.
And what's interesting about FLEABAG thing and in terms of performance. And maybe we'll come back to it is that it's written by Phoebe well, a bridge.
We also are KILLING EVE example, but she's acting in herself on what I notice. Looking through. It is there is a difference between how she writes the performance for FLEABAG and then how she writes it for others.
Right? So there's this great opening will play the example.
He's thrilled. Oh!
He looks thrilled and faintly whispers. I'm so thrilled.
It's funny in the big print because of the joke structure. The repetition of the thrilled, thrilled and then faintly whispers faintly is part of what makes it work faintly whispers.
It's the rhythm of it. I'm so thrilled, but it's not micromanaging his performance. It's not saying his smiles, but plus It's also going into that technique of the Christian world of effect, right, which is she's saying he's thrilled.
So whatever performance he gives, we're going to interpret as thrilled.
It's true, like on screen, right? He's thrilled as long as it's not clearly being like Oh my God, if he's got, like, a big smile we like He looks thrilled.
And then he says, I'm thrilled. We interpret whatever physical action is in.
He looks thrilled to be that on screen, but on the page we just need to know and again engaging our imagination, forcing us to work for our meal without us, given the raw, cold ingredients.
So it makes left. We imagine whatever that is, it's great running. But then you look at the FLEABAG and to the point where she writes a lot of stuff. In parents, articles like two camera with Fear.
Can I just say quickly with FLEABAG? It's so it directing.
As you said, the script direct her much more than any other characters she interacts with.
But the very structure off the piece where she does a lot of interacting with the viewer on I say the viewer deliberately this time.
So ah, lot of the direction has to be micromanaged because,
otherwise, things that are clearly going to be jokes just will not register on the page unless you call them out, like when,
on Page ten Bus Rodent says That was a joke, by the way, FLEABAG says.
Oh, I know she looks at us. Visibly disappointed.
She looks back at him That is a and it's also a gag that we wouldn't get.
It makes us complete it.
You would read this without the unfilmables without the direction of the performance without micromanaging her, and it wouldn't convey the humorous experience. Now this is quite a heightened version off that.
There's a few examples for the script where it talks about. She looks at the cameras.
She looks at us that's used throughout. It's interesting, actually. Says us.
It's not you, it's us. It's It's kind of an inclusive tonally. That's a choice they've laid. It's not aggressive.
Yeah, on DH. One of the observations you've made earlier is often the big use of unfilmables,
in script is at major turning points or points where you where the writer really wants to communicate to the reader in the same way that the eventual project wants to communicate with the audience member.
What's interesting is how spot some of that writing is in that micromanaging and a lot of stuff in parent articles.
But there's one idea they had to express in greater detail, which chorus iterated when she's on a date with bus rodent, you know, and he's talking about We'll be praying because he is such a great road.
You know about how his sister being deaf on DH. It's like you didn't learn to use sign language is Oh, God, no. I don't have time to learn it, but then it goes into this.
The sound of his voice fades out as FLEABAG imagines she is deaf lip reading him. All she can see is Ooh, which is written on the screen next to his mouth.
She looks at another punter. He is clearly saying, When was the last time you fucked a teenager, which is written on the screen?
She looks at a woman with a scarf around her head, clearly saying, and I woke up and he had just shaved my whole body, my eyebrows and everything. See, she points pencilled.
She looks back at bus rodent who were still talking no sound who written on the screen.
That's really dense, right?
It's kind of funny on the page, but it's funny or on screen, but she had to kind of communicate something that's actually pretty sophisticated idea.
It's just it's such a stark contrast to the other writing, which is so kind of simple and succinct and funny.
And this I still laughed at and you get part of the joke with the you've got to see it on the page. So watch the YouTube, which is like, who write like it's actually like multiple zeros, some capitalist, some randomly, right?
So it's actually making a visual gag on the page to help make that bunch of dense Tex funny.
She's gone to a riel effort to try and capture what that moment feels like. And I don't I think I agree with you.
She hasn't quite managed it, but she's yes, but exactly.
To make it as funny isn't on the screen. But she's communicated the intention, and you still get the what?
It's still got the punch line that Z, which is probably why she's making it a huge chunk of tax. So you get the rhythm of this huge chunk of text and then ends with FLEABAG to camera. Poor deaf bitch.
You know you're laughing at it now because it works because she's actually tried to make a visual joke out of it, which is like here's the bunch of the text and then the kind of like the button is really low.
So that's just show that even in writing this good, some some stuff, it's just hard.
And the concluding line off this pilot is a perfect piece of unfilmables.
Background Music
He looked at her in the rear view mirror. She drunkenly and sadly, smiles. He drives on in silence.
Her coat falls open. She only has had brought on underneath. She pulls out the little tin sculpture of the one with no arms. It sits on her lap.
Two women, one real one, not both with their innate femininity out and.
On DH. That's just such a. It's telling us what we're seeing on screen means, and the audience may or may not get that.
They may not get the symbolism that is being so clearly expressed, but it is telling us the intention that they want the audience to get.
I'm going back to the dramatic versus literary.
The intention that they want to convey is not one that FLEABAG is aware of they don't want to convey.
Oh, isn't it ironic that I'm here with my tits out? And I'm holding a statue of, ah, female shape with her tits out who's had her arms cut off in the same way that I'm emotionally stunted, like she's not aware of that?
This whole end visual is symbolic for the audience, not for FLEABAG, and they've just summed it up in the stage direction for the benefit of the reader.
All right. So speaking of running jokes on the page,
slapstick is obviously well, when we were doing this is like slapstick is really hard,
because you either have to micromanage it or you're writing tent and it doesn't necessarily land is funny, says that,
great scene off Ryan Gosling and Russell Crowe, March and Healy, where Healy's basically in the toilet and much comes into him right and the banging on the stall door.
This is what's written in the script.
THE NICE GUYS by Anthony Bugger Rosie and Shane Black here Li smiles slightly remains Stockstill March Cocky much.
First off, what the hell are you doing here? And secondly, how stupid do you think I am? Huh?
I got a permit to carry dumb arse. And since your little visit yesterday, this baby stays right here right where I can as he goes to pad his holster.
The stall door starts to swing closed.
He quickly has to bang it back open. He looks ridiculous.
The cigarette falls from his lips, burns his leg. He swears here, Li nearly help much.
Just stay right there. You mother march reaches for his pants. The stall door swings shut again.
He bangs it open. He can't hold his gun on the door And police Panzer much.
I got this, Healy. You mind if I look away or something?
March shifts tentatively rises up, gives up sits again.
March. All right, this is pissing me off. What do you want here? He takes a deep breath. Smiles, shrugs.
Healy. Well, I want to hire you that stops march cold.
He blinks mouth open like a fish much. You're joking right here, Lee.
I just don't think it convenes the kind of intent off it, which is He looks ridiculous and some of those moments, but like the cigarette falling from his lips burning his leg.
But it isn't anywhere Near is funny as what's on screen.
And obviously I read the script after I've seen the film. So it could be that the film did a better job, and maybe people that reading this for the first time laughed.
But in the end, similarly, that FLEABAG example.
It communicates the idea, and I guess what they have gone is we can't let the experience of just how funny this Khun Bay.
But let's convey the idea.
Yeah, And you are writing a gangster thriller.
And so they feel at least compelled. It's almost like you're framing device thing. This moment they're letting the reader No, this is a cz ridiculous as we're writing it.
This is a deliberate intent to make you laugh and make these characters seem ridiculous in this moment.
It gives you big beats. The cigarette falls from his lips burning his leg, you know, and it reminds us that he bangs it open.
He can't hold his gun and the door and pull his pants up.
Then he says, I got this, but Lisa's trying to give you the idea, which is he conned to all three things at once, and it's.
Yes. Yeah, The one bait that was missing that they must have found on Set is when Healy says you mind if I look away or something.
Healey in the film actually looks away, but they're in a men's bathroom, so he turns away from march and ends up looking in a mirror where all he Khun Sia's much still there so he can actually physically look away.
Yeah, actually, look, it's great,
but this is an interesting counter example, but your yet similar FLEABAG is that they've gone for communicating thie intention,
bopping able to hold your gun and the door and police pants up at the same time and that it's ridiculous without micromanaging it, because they've obviously realised on a certain level that they can't make.
It is funny as they intend, but they're giving the permission to the actors to make it funny.
So the last bits of performance beat is two contrasting moments from DRIVE.
E If I drive for you, you give me a time in the police. I give you a five minute window. Anything happens in that five minutes and I'm yours no matter what. I don't sit in while you're running it down. Now. Carry a gun,
DRIVE.
When we were looking, when we were kind of reverse engineering this homework, I wanted to look at that moment in DRIVE where they're in the elevator and the music soars and he kisses her and he turns around and then stomps her guy's brains out.
Interior elevator apartment block, Echo Park night driver and Irene ride down in silence, their eyes fixed on each other.
Tan suit watches them quietly considering a move, but driver glances at him and seize his gun.
The lights on the panel descend Driver pushes Iran against the back wall and kisses her.
The elevator bell finally rings as they reached the lower level.
Tan suit hesitates, but Driver knocks him against the panel selling him, then throws him against the back wall and to the floor, where he proceeds to stomp his brains out. Irene watches in horror.
Interestingly, I got access to four different versions of DRIVE on DH.
That moment was only in the final version that we have access to, and it is written very matter of factly.
None of the feeling off that seen none of the music the slo mo, the lighting, nor then the subsequent Gore horror off the head bashing out is in there.
Just spitballing that stuff that we've learned. There is a version of this scene that they could have chosen to write, which is, you know, like the Brian Duffy or commentary.
You know, it feel any conceit feels like,
they're alone in the elevator, the lights seemingly demon around them, you know, He goes in for that NTV kiss, you know, and then, like you said, and then the horror of it, he turns to the guy and then,
brutality, like they could have given the tonal shifts in the script.
You're a romantic, a romantic kiss blower, and then they've chosen not to, for whatever reason.
The point is, it's not that the version that they shot was non translatable to the script. It's that they chose not to.
I think there is a version. Whether it would have been is effective. I'm not sure I'd like to think I've been a writer that could have made it as a.
Well, I don't want to criticise the writer here because the writer so clearly did what we're aspiring. The page to replicate in that earlier scene.
Oh, yeah, I'm not criticising. The Roma are saying that they've made a choice not to overcomplicated on the back.
Given the number of draughts that we've seen and how close their dates are together.
I'm purely speculating here, but it felt very much like here's the director saying,
to the writer, Here's how I envisage thiss just right the bare minimum version ofthe it because the right in an earlier scene very much dives into,
the feeling and those unfilmables.
There. I stay on each other. The attraction palpable Driver finally breaks the tension, making a tentative move towards the door.
Irene opens it for him, looking up into his eyes. Driver knows he could kiss her, wants to, but something inside holds him back.
Instead, he just offers his help.
So it's What's interesting about this sequence in the film is that you feel like the music's doing a lot of the heavy lifting.
Background Music
But when you would have heard from some of the examples, it's kind of reeling in the page as well.
And this is to me really good performance rating. It's actionable, although you work to me makes this feel like it's actual.
And this is coming from my limited perspective as a director in someone that's very conscious of writing, isn't this idea that the attraction is palpable, Right?
That's a clarification. You tell. I want. I want you guys to make your attraction palpable.
That is an unplayable direction. You're laughing, right, because it's unplayable.
What the actors would have to do is what they call translate, which is that they've got to find something that is playable.
Their eyes staying on each other is playable. I just you want people to feel like they are attracted to each other.
You can't keep your eyes off each other, but then you can say, But if they look atyou, you need to look away. That's playable, right?
But it also says Driving knows he could cook kiss her wants to, but something inside holds him back.
That is playable action. You could translate it into blocking.
I mean, Ryan causing so good that I don't know what his internal work is to translate that into playable.
But knowing he could kiss her isn't is a playable state, and he wants to.
You want to kiss her? Think about kissing her. You, Khun, Khun direct. The actors think about kissing.
Where I'd say the pitfall is here is you could write The attraction is palpable. And then, unfortunately, you cast two actors who end up hating each other because you hear so many storeys of those, like failed on screen chemistry.
Yeah, but I don't want to speculate that, but I think you can make it. Also make it work and you can make it work through editing. And you could make it work through directing, and you can direct the music.
It is a line from an earlier draught DRIVE.
That scene is in the same as that same shot out, but there's an earlier draught like and by early women, like two months earlier.
So there's a cup. There's one from the side. Earlier scene just before that one, which is driver slips out of the room, uncomfortable with the intimate moment between mother and son.
It's a nice bit of riding again. His performance. He's uncomfortable, he's slipping out.
But there's the moment when I reign and driver with Shannon and they cut it out is a great, lucrative big print, with Shannon smiles to himself, sensing Irene's interesting driver.
And there's just a few others that they've built up the attraction over these few pages through the big print.
So it ends with the attraction between There's palpable, but they've built it up over a few lines just to make it clear that they're drawn to each other.
Well, in terms of like helping out our listeners here, I would go back to your earlier piece of advice, which is going audit an acting class so that you know what is playable action and what is not.
In the end. For me, it's kind of instinctive, because generally it's what is your intent? What is it that you are doing to the other person? So something that is internal right, which is uncomfortable with the intimate moment between mother and son?
That's very hard to act, but it's actually the action is he's slipping out of the room. That's the action. That's what makes it playable.
On the key here is going to be whether the audience buys the performance that you've written such that they believe the action because the action is going to happen.
And it's whether the motivation that you've provided in the big print is sufficiently playable, that the audience believes it.
And if you'll forgive me, I think that's a neat Segway into MICHAEL CLAYTON.
Michael, Thank God. Look, I got a situation. I just stripped down naked in a deposition room in Milwaukee.
You are the senior litigating partner of one of the largest, most respected law firms in the world. You are a legend, dramatic depressive. I am Shiva, the God of Death.
Even though we're moving out of performance beads into big, sort of tone, mood theme beats the beat that's in MICHAEL CLAYTON that we're talking about, which is the horse is seen.
It was so important for the audience to buy it because if they didn't buy it, they would feel cheated by what was going on in the movie at the time.
So just to put a little bit of context before we dive into the actual big print of the scene is the audience knows that there's a bomb in Michael's car.
It's a legal conspiracy thriller, MICHAEL CLAYTON, played by George Clooney.
He's driving around being really stressed. He's been portrayed there. He is unaware there's a bomb in the car. Correct?
Is unaware,
but he knows he's being not tailed.
No. Well, the key thing is he's been portrayed so far as a fixer is a very a moral character, and he's finally sort of found his moral line.
So he's driving around having a very internal tussle with his own moral code,
whereas what the audience is seeing is him driving around with a bomb under his car on the people who got the detonator for the bomb driving around, trying to find the best place to blow him up, and they actually lose him,
because he is driving erratically because that's what his internal tussle is doing.
The huge open pasture surrounded by forest, the sun just starting to rise, cold mist hanging over the whole valley.
Nothing but grey and green. Stark perfect Michael, the car jumping the fence, walking into the field behind him, the Mercedes with the engine running,
the three horses poised at the crest of pasture, hanging in the fog like ghosts watching Michael come toward them.
Michael's face as he walks. Everything that's happened writ large in these eyes, everything he's done wrong, all the things he hasn't done, wounded and weary and humbled by the abundance of his inadequacies.
It is to weep. And finally, he stops just standing there.
The horses, the fog, the woods.
The Mercedes explodes. The horse is already running before Michael can turn back pieces of the car that had been blown into the sky, still raining down before he's fully grasped. What's happening.
Michael, simply shocked, senseless, standing there frozen, stunned the car.
His car is gone, replaced by a scalito shell of fire smoke pluming little follow up explosions popping every couple of seconds.
Michael looks around, looks back. He should be dead. He is not.
And now, as the reality of that sinks in As the smell of burning car finally reaches him, we can see the confusion. Drain away.
All that staggered chaos in Michael's eyes, suddenly replaced with steel.
He should be dead. He is not.
So what's fascinating is in this sequence, whenever there with the would be assassins trying to find him and blow him up,
it's very, very tight, very dramatic, only writing the action zero unfilmables.
And yet when it into cuts with Michael, all the things our internal unfilmables.
So, for example, Michael escaping, driving wild and this time around we know what's in his head.
Definitely running Mohr than from Mr Greer and Jerry Dante and another Michael turning again.
Aimless windows open cold are whipping through braking, suddenly impulsive, turning suddenly faster now and and you finally get to this amazing moment that stands out to us is he just is suddenly in this very,
country landscape,
and he sees some horses and he gets out of the car just before they blow it up.
That's why it's so important to sell. This moment is the audience has to believe that Michael would get out of his car fortuitously, just a tte the moment that it blows up so that they don't feel Rob.
It's a coincidence of him getting out of trouble.
Yes, and they have to buy that huge character turmoil and his decision to get out of the car so that the whole house of cards of that film doesn't feel like robbery.
I recommend you read this script because it's a great script, but the juxtaposition in the big print and the style of writing of those to intercut scenes.
But it's not just that. The thing is, the script is telling us how to interpret what we've just seen right. It's a revelation. He has this moment that in the film you like, What's he doing?
It's a dreaming moment and we're kind of in their car explodes, and then he becomes more determined, and we clarify that through action because he starts throwing stuff into the fire and he looks more determined.
But the script is making sure in the big print that we understand what it means.
We can see the confusion drain away. All that staggered chaos in Michael's eyes, suddenly replaced with deal right.
That's really important because it's this framing device. It's chosen to frame it at the end.
It's a revelation, so we catch up to what he's going through, so it gives us the visuals and it gives us the emotional meaning of them. But that could be conveyed through music. But the thematic meaning, the way we need to interpret it, is delayed at the end, right?
Yes, absolutely. But there goes to such lengths to convince us that is perfectly reasonable for him to drive erratically, wind up in this field season horses and feel compelled by seeing horses toe open his car, step out and walk towards them.
You're talking about the initial.
Yes, and you're talking about the ad moment like the initial moment on the page is littered with Muchmore unfilmables.
Everything that he's done is wrong. All the things he hasn't done, wounded and weary and humbled by the abundance of his inadequacies. None of that is necessarily conveyed us a hell of an order for George cleaning to pull off.
And I think the direction, the cinematography, the music, thie editing and George Clooney do pull that moment off.
And the context of the film before.
Yes, they do manage to pull it off, which is astonishing, but the length they have to go to on the page so that some producer doesn't say it's ridiculous. Why the fuck is he looking at horses?
Well, it tells you one of our pages later what it meant.
That's my point is that if didn't clarify in the big print, the meaning behind what we just saw, I think it would be more of a stumbling block.
I don't think he can read the opening in isolation of the end.
Yes, yeah, I think that is an excellent.
That's my point, you know, because I think if you're writing those kinds of visual sequences, as we will see, this is me transitioning into tree of life,
that you kind of actually need to tell them where he does something like handle them a bit, tell them the meaning behind what they're watching.
We'll get ahead in this world.
He's afraid of you back. Things are going. A doctor just always wanted to be strong. Be your own.
So Tree of Life is the first of examples on Don't wantto look.
It's an amazing film, and we kind of looked at a couple of sequences. But what we settled on as the one to look at is the creation sequence, which is kind of like the first act,
com roundly first act where it kind of goes through famously.
If you haven't seen the film, it kind of starts at the Big Bang and then fast forward like life on Earth in like this wordless twenty minute sequence.
Background Music
At the edge of the city. He sees a tree. He reaches out to touch it.
The instant he does, the universe springs up from its source. The creation.
We show the growth of the cosmos, the great epic of evolution from the Big Bang through the long ages of geological time, down to the present day,
from the beginning, cooperation plays as great a part as competition in the ascent of life.
It succeeds where naked power and selfishness do not, making the deadliest enemies indispensable to each other's survival.
Predators shape their prey, driving them to develop stronger armour, greater dexterity and speed wondrous facts that had life not been compelled to face the threat of a violent death. It might never have risen above the news.
Death comes as a late arrival to the creation to give life a greater capability and scope, paradoxically, to make it stronger and more lasting.
It tells us right up front we're watching, which is we show the growth of the cosmos, the great epic of evolution for the Big Bang through the long ages of geological time, down to the present day.
And then it describes each of those beats visually.
Then there's another moment where it needs to clarify the meaning of what we're seeing from the beginning, which is once life starts appearing for the beginning. Cooperation plays by La Bella.
Then again, when humans are on the picture, it is constantly telling us for theme, and someone's visual predators shape their prey, driving them to develop, its constantly telling us the meaning ofthe what we're saying,
interspersed with the great visuals.
You know, the one I love at the end is the Swazi in which is, we suggest, in quick succession, the steps by which he meaning mankind moved from a life of nomadic savagery. Tow a settled, stable culture.
You know, it kind of tells us the whole storey, you know, and it repeats the similar kind of technique, and I don't want to pull out as many examples.
At the end, there's a very kind of spiritually ending, and it does the same techniques where it constantly tells you the thematic meaning.
Well, I know you know, we've run massively over long on this particular episode, but I do want a contrast,
that very surreal sequence and his writing of it where, as you say, he is continually telling us the meaning.
You know, even lines like together the bacteria arrive at a result which none of it by itself could have achieved on DH.
There are lines like that all throughout that sequence, where when I watched the film, I got a great deal of meaning from watching that sequence, none of which is what he is writing on the page.
It is beautifully written. It's almost like reading a book, but none of it is what my personal experience of watching his film was, whereas in contrast to the end sequence, which is actually, it's also surreal.
But it's surreal, featuring the characters that we've spent two hours with already, and they're all coming together in this kind of like heaven what I interpreted to be,
you know, death and rebirth and heaven and that sequence.
I don't know for what reason, but everything that I was reading into that later sequence, and this is probably saying Maura, about Mia's the viewer than about.
Malik is a writer director, but where he's saying in the big print in the climax, things like exterior sand dunes, reunion and rebirth, exterior sure of eternity.
Music of unbounded joy.
You know that that stuff I actually felt Mohr and it was Mme. Or Representative of my experience of the film than the stuff that was more surreal earlier on.
And maybe that's purely because it was detached from character. I don't.
Yeah, because I actually reckon, and it has been while since I watched her life.
But when I was reading that, I swear in that creation sequence I probably got about I don't wanna say eighty percent, like give it accurate.
But I reckon I got a lot of what he was trying to communicate thematically in the actual see sequence as it appeared on screen fertility stuff about prey and cooperation and because it is kind of tangibly shoot herbal.
And I definitely got the bat big ICT, that framing device of we're following the journey of off life to death and the introduction of death.
And then how you know, life feeds on life and all that stuff and what is interesting. And this is true.
I met with someone who was involved in investing in Tree of Life, and he raved, How great script wass.
And here's a spiritual person. So he connected to the spiritual elements of the tree of Life.
But I also think part of the genius of it is it's not trying to ops. Few Kate.
It's not trying to obscure its meaning. It is telling you its meaning.
It's not trying to be clever in that sense, and this reminds me off, which I think is weird way to end.
But it kind of perfect because it's actually such a small scene from THREE BILLBOARDS OUTSIDE EBBING MISSOURI wanted to do, which is the dear scene in THREE BILLBOARDS OUTSIDE EBBING MISSOURI when Mildred.
Goes out to one of the billboards and sees a form and we were like, Yeah, that feels like one of those great cinematic moments and really beautiful and this is the description of the form arriving.
Mildred stays dead. Still breathless of the beauty of it watching is it almost appears to look up it.
And still no arrests and cock its head of question Its spots Mildred suddenly and is startled slightly, but stand its ground.
Mildred. Hey, baby. Yep. Still no arrests. How come I wonder?
Because there ain't no God on the world's empty. And it don't matter what we do to each other. Hope No pause.
How come you come appear out of nowhere? Looking so pretty? You weren't trying to make me believe in reincarnation or something, are you? Well, you're pretty, but you ain't her. She got killed, and now she'll be dead forever.
I do. Thank you for coming up, though. If I had some food, I'd give it to you. But I've only got some Garrido's and I'd be scared that kill you. They'd become appointee. Then where would we be?
The phone finally decides to amble away off towards the hazy sunset horizon.
She almost cries, but doesn't quite Mildred. Now, Mildred.
They've had this beautiful moment, the dead still the breathless beauty, and you're wondering what does it mean?
And then Mildred tells us what it means, but is telling the audience.
Well tells the Ford.
And yet the way it's done is beautiful, because it makes us feel like that's our thoughts.
And so we come away feeling smart, right? So we're actually actively engaging out.
And this is the cleverness of this structure when it's to having the form coming up this surreal moment, like the horses in my Claydon were actively engaging our imagination. What does this mean? It's thematic sequences thing.
Why am I seeing this? What does this mean?
And then that question is answered within the text.
Yeah, they're definitely thematic sequences like MICHAEL CLAYTON Tree of Life and this scene in the writers and directors.
In all three of those films, writer directors have taken their foot off the plot.
The plot has well, that's not fair and MICHAEL CLAYTON. There's plot happening in the background.
But for Michael himself, the plot has stopped, and almost character has stopped to the point where it's forcing the audience.
Teo ask, Why is this happening, right?
Exactly on. But then it answers the question.
Yes, all of them, in a script level, do and THREE BILLBOARDS OUTSIDE EBBING MISSOURI, one that actually answers it overtly for the audience by doing so in dialogue.
Yeah, and that's an interesting comparison, because if we use our metrics, you know who they riding it for.
The dear scene is for the reader and the audience and the characters we'd leave.
That dialogue scene is also informing Mildred as both forming the character, but also your forming the actor howto play. That character Tree of Life is definitely for the rear and for the crew.
I also happen to know people that worked on tree in life, and it sounds like that's kind of how Terrence Malick directs is very much into the meaning of things, any response to them on my car.
That's the feeling I get from this, as opposed to someone like Ridley Scott, who apparently directs very specifically in terms of visual aesthetic MICHAEL CLAYTON.
Same thing that's a little bit different to like the DRIVE thing, which is for the reader in terms of those for menses. But the actor as well.
See, I'm not sure about your character thing, you know, like I don't know how unfilmables Khun b towards the character unfilmables like.
Obviously big print can go towards cat like dialogue goes towards character, but it's doing act of what to say. So I don't know if I agree with that.
Your your thing about reminiscing about the past where you don't actually then cut to the flashback. So that is for the reader. And it is for the character, but not necessarily for the audience.
But it's not communicating to. It's not communicating to the character.
It's communicating to the reader about the character community, carrying character to the right.
I know we're arguing Semantics at the end of light don't have ours, but But that's kind of like I think you can communicate to the actor, to the crew, to the reader, into the audience.
But I don't think you can communicate to. The character can communicate about character the same way. Communicate about plot.
If there's two characters in the scene, or even if there's just one, if if a character is realising something like, there's the key example from girl on the Train.
Yeah, but to me that is communicating to the actor what the character is doing.
If you're taking it that broad, then absolutely everything the character does is communication to the act.
Yes, what is dialogue? We're telling the actor what to say doesn't tell the character what to say.
Yeah, but my point about distinguishing the character is from the purpose of unfilmables is if you're writing something on the page that off which the character is unaware, that is a different category of unfilmables.
Can you give me a deaf in? Yes, yes, that is.
The conclusion. A conclusion concluding line of FLEABAG.
Yes, that's for But that's not communicating to the actor either. Or do you think it communicates to the actor by the nature of it being in the screen.
Yeah, yes, I don't I don't think there is ever an example ofthe script communicating to the character where they're not also not the act.
And not like, in that sense, yes, it's true. The script is always communicating to the actor, and even a thematic line like the end of FLEABAG is communicating to the actor.
But then it's all communicating to the crew, but I think there is specific like if the idea that the Earth is such a weird argument but kind of useful, right?
Like if you mean the character as embodied in that specific moment, then yes, I understand. To me, it's just you communicating to the.
Yes, I think you're always you're always communicating to the actor. I think there would be lots of examples where the character is unaware, but you were still writing things to communicate to the actor.
Yes, but I can't think of a unfilmables that is communicating specifically to the character about.
I suppose that's what you're trying to say about the realisation is that it's something that's happening in the moment to the character.
But the important thing is that is then being communicated to the audience, and it's how do we show that to the audience?
Ideally, you show it to the audience through action.
Otherwise, you have a moment and a swell of music as you right, because that's a way of accessing the interiority and within the grammar of the film language.
We understand that to mean that they've had a realisation, but in a dramatic context, it's better to follow up with a consequence from that realisation. But usually what happens?
You know, Charles realises that he's go the toilet portion cut to chance flushing a toilet, right.
So, but I So what we've done now so far and we'll get to our learnings is we've looked at a whole lot of different micro examples.
Scott twenty eight humour In today's episode.
What we would like to come back to in a next episode is take these micro learnings and apply them to large sequences.
And I'm not going to be definitive about this, but the.
The reason we want to do longer sequences is what I think we'll find is the way that these techniques are being intertwined with other writing techniques. Yeah, yes.
Yes, yeah, well, also, the goal of thiss nor the inspiration for this episode is how do you write those big or inspiring moments? Because I don't think many of the moments we've covered today some of them are inspiring. But not all of them are.
And often those big or inspiring moments are the culmination ofthe a sequence, not just in a moment.
Yes, a great and its performance and its theme. And it's for the reader. And it's Yeah, you're right. It's mood, It's tone.
It's everything Kaire working together.
So again, not to be definitive. This might change in the in the few weeks that were,
settling on homework, but we will be looking hopefully at witness wish you were never really here Moonlight, the invitation and possibly at other films like The Witch and First Reformed.
But suit, tell me your key learnings from the micro use of unfilmables.
So I guess the thing. That's the way we started off with the idea ofthe framing like the beginning.
In the end, I still think that kind of framing device, the sandwich strategy or hamburger. We have the meet in the middle, which is kind of a visual detail, visual and aural.
But having the qualifier at the beginning of the end is valid.
I can't think of an example off the things that we picked that we thought were good that didn't have it. Maybe that's just our taste. It could be selection bias that is valid.
We didn't talk great detail of all these examples about how what they're trying to communicate into whom. But I still think that is true.
I think what emerged to us is very important. Is thie active engagement of imagination and that is related to framing right?
How you frame something engages the brain in different ways. There is like What does this mean?
Oh, that's what it means is different from this is what it means and explain the images because that kind of still forces you to imagine them.
But they're being directed in a particular way, which is through the lens off America on the brink of economic collapse or whatever that line is, you know, And then it kind of clarify, like wraps it all up.
And I think they're actually different emotional experiences on the page in a way that I can't quite articulate. Yet they're related to point of view because they are about Are we ahead or Behind?
But there are we ahead or behind of the author.
You know, if they are way ahead of behind of the writer, rather the character. It's the literary experience, right?
Andi, I think that what will be interesting to kind of tap on to witness with you here and moonlight and the invitation is the way they manipulate us, where they give us that kind of contextual.
Unfilmables information around the visual information or your audio visual, because this also includes dialogue.
That example from Battlestar Galactica Grim dialogue is contextualising the dialogue.
So it's Contextualising, something that we see on screen.
So I think my main landings are your main learnings, but they're different aspect offthe, Um, I actually think your mind bomb that you stumbled across earlier, which is on unfilmables great if it,
encourages the reader to use their imagination to become involved.
If it's, you know, to use your oxymoron universally specific or specifically universal in that you're not describing exactly what's on screen.
But you are describing something that is exactly related ble to every reader, even though the what they will create in their minds will be unique to them.
It's tangible.
Yeah, I love your sandwich theory as not just a za framing device, but as a piece of craft because we very rarely found unfilmables in the absence of something film a ble next to it.
It was often hand in hand. It wasn't we very rarely, and we were only looking for good examples.
Are we saying really? Can we think of an example that wasn't that.
I mean, maybe YOUR BRIDESMAID IS A BITCH would be the only one I can think of. Yeah.
Kiss?
But everything it was talking about in the unfilmables was unrelated to the kiss. Almost.
Yes, but conjured the imagination. So that's kind of litmus test.
Um, I actively engaging the reader to imagine what this is. And if the answer is no, it's probably not a good use of an unfilmables.
I mean, a tree of life is such a weird car example, because all that thematic stuff doesn't conjure your imagination.
But it helps you contextualised all the weird shit that he's saying, like when you're talking about, like, bacterial life and cooperation, I guess you kind of imagine it imagining what that looks like I have known.
Well, I'm imagining bacteria moving around each other, but what I'm not thinking about is how cooperation is essential to evolution.
But we like. Tree of Life was an excellent example because it's beautifully written and it's so important.
It was so important for him to write in this script the theme and the meaning behind it.
But you know, it's a very unique like Malick's films are inherently symbolic and surreal, and they're not, like, narratively driven for the most part.
Or they've got different engines to them other than narrative. So way chose it as a contrast example.
The thematic, fea Manic engines.
My final key learning from this is I feel that a lot of these very successful writers or successful projects,
only used unfilmables where it was Mohr efficient to write on unfilmables than to write what was actually unfilmables or actually seen on screen.
Oh, yeah, well, I guess it was conjecture, but we kind of did spitball how you would, how they would be film a ball and showed the excessive detail right that would go into doing that and unnecessary.
Because ultimately you're focusing attention. And what we're saying is the extra that's walking around. That's hot warning. The Aaron does not need a huge amount of detail, you know, it's a wide shot rather than a close up on a narrative.
Well, I think I remember that time when we were planning this episode that you like.
It feels like we could do this episode in the airing it over real quick. And I'm like, I'm not so sure Chads. And you're, like, off.
What do you got planned with all that homework? Why are you getting more home anymore?
Way we're getting into a little bit of, like, just brought a theory about how to write big prints, territory and, you know, and then you started reading that I'm working. You're like, Oh, yeah, I see what you mean. Yeah.
Yes, I think we could have still done less homework and had a shorter episode.
But hopefully our listeners enjoy three our podcasts.
They haven't complained so far.
Thanks in particular off all our listeners to all our patrons who bring UME or draft zero more often on DH off those amazing patrons special thanks in particular to Chris Walker food for offering editing services.
But then our high teer aur top tier patri ins.
Matteo, Nick, Daniel, Carrie, Paul, Sandra, Rob and Crab Bless you guys.
You guys are amazing if you're still becoming a patron of draft zero and encouraging us to release more draft zero more often money, which is used to go towards editing, getting actors to read big printed sort of us.
But also, if you go to the website, you realise that we're now kind of embedding video with the podcast. We're also doing transcripts again because you can now search the draft zero audio.
You can search within episodes on the Web players, which is actually pretty awesome.
I'm describing it, Paulie, but it's actually really cool. So we're getting human cleaned up transcripts for episodes moving forward, but we're hopefully doing that with about a catalogue, but a whole bunch of reasons to support us. Please cheque us out.
Patron, patron.
We can also choose to get draft zero merchandise pillows.
Cui's phone cases, which is also a great way to show your support or, you know, maybe just raid us on.
I choose like us on Facebook, like Yepes described to us on YouTube.
Send us some good vibes on Twitter.
We're not desperate at all.
No, we're not doing this for validation in any way.
If you feel so compelled to argue with Chazz and myself about anything on this episode or anything, in general, you can find many ways to contact us at draft zero dot com.
And there you will also find the show notes for this episode, as well as links to share the Word and Raina Review ES on Apple Podcasts on DH If you're feeling even more supportive, you can also find links to our patron.
I
think these two cops Khun stand each other getting into trouble around you. The bad guys don't stand a chance with everybody.
Well, I haven't killed you yet. Mel Gibson, Danny Glover. Way better register you as a LETHAL WEAPON. LETHAL WEAPON Rated R. Starts Friday, March sixth.